##  The Nature of Christ

- Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.

Also see [[10.01 The Person of Christ|the person of Christ]], which discusses the natures of Christ in his Person.

"The Church confessed the doctrine of the two natures of Christ" (318).

There is a necessity of the two natures of Christ. "Since man sinned, it was necessary that man should bear the penalty. Moreover, the paying of the penalty involved suffering of body and soul, such as only man is capable of bearing #John_12:27; #Acts_3:18; #Hebrews_2:14; #Hebrews_9:22. Christ needed to assume human nature, not only with all its essential properties, but also with all the infirmities to which it is liable after the fall. It should thus descend to the depths of degradation to which man has fallen #Hebrews_2:17, 18" (322).

"In the [[7.01 The Divine Decree of God in General|Decrees of God]], it was essential that the Mediator should also be very God. This was necessary, so that (1) He might bring a sacrifice of infinite value and render perfect obedience to the law of God and (2) He might bear the wrath of God redemptively" (322).

- Bavinck, Herman. Reformed Dogmatics: Abridged in One Volume. Grand Rapids, MI: Baker Academic, 2011.

"He is truly man and truly God; it is the same Christ who created the world and who was born and died. One person in two natures, without confusion, without change, without division, without separation" (408).

- DeYoung, Kevin. Daily Doctrine. Wheaton, IL: Crossway, 2025.

"The New Testament leaves no doubt that Jesus of Nazareth, Jesus the Christ, was and is fully God" (170).

- Macleod, Donald. The Person of Christ: Contours of Christian Theology. Downers Grove, IL: InterVarsity Press, 1998.

"The logos united flesh to himself (hypostasis)" (188).

"The term hypostatic union encapsulates three truths: that Christ is one person; that the union between his two natures arises from the fact that they both belong to the same person; and that this one person, the son of God, is the Agent behind all of the Lord's actions, the Speaker of all his utterance and the Subject of all his experiences" (189).

"To say that in Christ's godhead and manhood co-exist in one person and that Jesus is both divine and human. Jesus Christ is Yahweh, God, and man in one person. Closely linked to the doctrine of the hypostatic union is the idea of the communion in attributes. The properties of both natures and substances were preserved and coexisted in One Power" (192-94).

- Ferguson, Sinclair. The Holy Spirit: Contours of Christian Theology. Downers Grove, IL: InterVarsity Press, 1996.

"Moses had ascended the mountain. When he descended, he had in his possession the Ten Commandments, the law of God. Christ, too, had recently ascended. At Pentecost, he comes down, not with the law written on tablets of clay, but with the gift of his own Spirit to write the law in the hearts of believers and by his power to enable them to fulfill the law's commands" (61).

- Owen, John. *Communion with God*. Banner of Truth Trust, Carlisle, PA: 2024.

"Because Christ was God and man in one person, he was able to suffer and to bear whatever punishment was due to us #Matthew_20:28; #Acts_20:28; #1_John_3:16). There was room enough in Christ's breast to receive the points of all the swords that were sharpened by the law against us. And the burden of that curse that was due to use. It was because of this that he was so willing to undertake the work of our redemption #Hebrews_10:7-8. If Christ had not been man, he would not have suffered for men, and if he had not been God, his suffering could not have satisfied infinite justice." (75).
### The Deity of Christ

- Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.

"It saw in it a mystery revealed by the Word of God. IT was and remained ever since for the Church an article of faith, far beyond human comprehension" (319).

The Old Testament contains a prediction of a divine Messiah #Psalm_2:6-12; #Psalm_45:6; #Psalm_110:1; #Isaiah_9:6; #Jeremiah_23:6; #Daniel_7:13; #Micah_5:2; #Zechariah_13:7; #Malachi_3:1.

John and Paul teach the deity of Christ. In the Gospel of John the most exalted view of the person of Christ is found as pears from the following passages: 1:1-3, 14, 18, 2:24; 3:15-18, 35, 36; 4:14; 15:18, 20, 21, 25-27; 11:41-44; 20:28; 1 John 1:3; 2:23; 4:14; 5:5; 10-13, 20).

In the Pauline epistles and the Epistle of Hebrews, we see the same evidence #Romans_1:7; #Romans_9:5; #1_Corinthians_1:1-3; #1_Corinthians_2:8; #2_Corinthians_5:10; #Galatians_2:20; #Galatians_4:4; #Philippians_2:6; #Colossians_2:9; #1_Timothy_3:16; #Hebrews_1:1-3, 5, 8, #Hebrews_4:14; #Hebrews5:8).

"He stands out as a supernatural person throughout, the Son of Man and the Son of God. His character and works justify His claim. Notice particularly the following passages: Matthew 5:17; 9:6; 11:1-6; 14:33; 16:16; 28:18; 25:31; Mark 8:38" (320).

"Jesus is self-conscious that He was the Messiah. For those who accept the Gospel testimony, there can be no doubt as to the fact that Jesus was conscious of being the very Son of God. (Matthew 11:27; Luke 10:22; Matthew 21:37, Mark 12:6; Luke 20:13; Luke 20:41-44)" (321).

"There are several passages in Matthew and Luke, in which Jesus speaks of the first person of the Trinity as my Father (Matthew 7:21; 10:32; 11:27; 12:50; 15:13; 16:17; 18:10; 20:23; 25:34; 26:29; Luke 2:49; 22:29; 24:49). In the Gospel of John the consciousness of being the very Son of God is even more apparent in such passages as John 3:13; 5:17; 19-27; 6:37-40; 8:34-36; 10:17" (321).

- DeYoung, Kevin. Daily Doctrine. Wheaton, IL: Crossway, 2025.

"Christ possess the communicable attributes of God. He is filled with love (Ephesians 3:17-19), and full of grace and truth (John 1:14). Christ also possesses the incommunicable attributes of God. He is eternal (Micah 5:2; John 17:5; Revelations 1:8; 22:23)" (171).

- Macleod, Donald. The Person of Christ: Contours of Christian Theology. Downers Grove, IL: InterVarsity Press, 1998.

"That the early church believed Jesus Christ to be divine. It applied to him the highest conceivable designations (Son of God, Son of Man, Lord, God); it saw him as possessing the full range of divine attributes, performing the full range of divine functions and enjoying the full range of divine prerogatives; it worshipped him and prayed to him and broke out in doxology at the mere mention of his name" (Macleod, Person of Christ, 1998: 109).

- Owen, John. Communion with God. Banner of Truth Trust, Carlisle, PA: 2024.

"He is God blessed for evermore (Romans 9:5). He is the Lord our Righteousness (Jeremiah 23:6). The angels in their highest glory hide their faces in his presence (Isaiah 6:2). Consider the endless, bottomless, boundless grace and compassion that is in Christ, the God of Zion" (69).

"There is enough grace, mercy, and pardon in one of God's promises for the sins of millions of worlds, if they existed, because the promise is supllied from an infinite, bottomloss reservoir. Show me the sinner who can spread out his sins to infinite dimensions and I will show him this infinite and eternal reservour of grace and mercy" (70).

### The Humanity of Christ

- Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.

"There has been a time when the reality, Gnosticism, and the natural integrity, Docetism and Apollinarianism, of the human nature of Christ were denied, but at present no one seriously questions the real humanity of Jesus Christ" (321).

"We ascribe to Christ not only natural, but also moral, intellectual, or moral perfection, that is, sinlessness. This means not merely that Christ could avoid sinning (*potuit non peccare*), and did avoid it, but also that He couldn't sin (*non potuit peccare*) because nature denotes the essential bond between the human and the divine natures" (322).

- Grudem, Wayne. Systematic Theology. Grand Rapids, MI: Zondervan Academic. 2020.

"Jesus did not give up his human nature after his death and resurrection, for he appeared to his disciples as a man after the resurrection, even with he scar of the nail prints in his hands (John 20:25-27)" (677).

- DeYoung, Kevin. Daily Doctrine. Wheaton, IL: Crossway, 2025.

"The humanity of Christ can be seen in his outer life. Jesus had a body, he grew and developed, and he looked like other members of his family (Luke 2:16). The humanity of Christ can also be seen in his inner life. Jesus knew what it was to be genuinely distressed (Mark 14:33), angry (3:5), annoyed (10:14), surprised (6:6), and disappointed (8:17)" (172).

## Defining Nature and Person

- Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.

"The term denotes the total of all the essential qualities of a thing, that which makes it what it is. Nature is a substance possessed in common with all the essential qualities of such a substance. The term person denotes a complete substance endowed with reason, and consequently a responsible subject of its actions" (324).

"There is but one person in the Mediator, the unchangeable Logos. The Logos furnishes the basis for the personality of Christ. It would not be correct, however, to say that the person of the mediator is divine only. The incarnation constituted Him a complex person, consisting of two natures. He is the God-man" (325).

"It is well to stress the fact that the incarnation was a personal act" (327).

"*A communcatio idiomatum, or communication of properties*. This means that the properties of both the human and the divine natures are not inherent to the person, but rather ascribed to it. The deity cannot share in human weaknesses; neither can man participate in any of the essential perfections of the Godhead" (327).

"The union of the two natures in one person is a mystery which we cannot grasp, and which for that very reason is often denied" ( 328).

## The Centrality of the Incarnation

- Bavinck, Herman. Reformed Dogmatics: Abridged in One Volume. Grand Rapids, MI: Baker Academic, 2011.

"The incarnation is the work of the entire Triune God; Christ was sent by the Father and conceived by the Holy Spirit. But Holy Scripture ascribes the incarnation to the Son (John 1:14; Philippians 2:6; Hebrews 2:14-15). Incarnation is also related to creation. The incarnation was not necessary, but the creation of human beings in God's image is a supposition and preparation for the incarnation of God" (412-13).

- Grudem, Wayne. Systematic Theology. Grand Rapids, MI: Zondervan Academic. 2020.

"Throughout history, there have been objections to the New Testament teaching on the full deity of Christ. One attack on this doctrine deserves mention here because it created a significant controversy, as the contributors to the volume were all recognized church leaders.  The book, titled The Myth of God Incarnate, posits that human life and thought are inherently flawed and constantly evolving. Therefore, Jesus was not both human and deity" (688).

"The biblical teaching about the full deity and full humanity of Christ is so extensive that both have been believed from he earliest times in the history of the church. But three other views eventually rejected as heretical should be mentioned:

- Apollinarianism - one person of Christ had a human body but not a human mind or spirit.

- Nestorianism - is the doctrine that there were two separate persons in Christ, a human person and a divine person, a teaching that is distinct from the biblical view that sees Jesus as one person.

- DeYoung, Kevin. Daily Doctrine. Wheaton, IL: Crossway, 2025.

"The incarnation refers to the embodiment of God in human form. More specifically, in Christian theology the doctrine of the incarnation affirms that the divine Son of God, the second person of the Trinity, assumed a human nature and came to earth as the God-man Jesus Christ" (174).