Five names call for a brief discussion at this point. They are partly descriptive of His natures, partly of His official position, and partly of the work for which He came into the world.

## The Names of Christ

### Jesus

- Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.

"The name Jesus is the Greek form of the Hebrew *Jehoshua*, *Joshua*, *Josh*, and is a derivation of this common name of the Savior, which is veiled in obscurity. The generally accepted opinion is that it is derived from the root *yasha* to save" (315).

- DeYoung, Kevin. Daily Doctrine. Wheaton, IL: Crossway, 2025.

"The English name "Jesus" comes from the Greek Iesous, which in turn comes from the Hebrew Yehoshua or Jeshua. Jesus was a common name among first-century Jews. As Matthew indicates, the name Jesus refers to the Lord who saves" (166).

 "Jesus is the Word made flesh #John_1:1-18, the brea of life #John_6:35, and the King of the Jews (19:21). He is a helper (14:16)  and the great I am (8:58). Jesus is the way, the truth and life (14:6)" (167).

### Christ

- Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.

"If Jesus is the personal, Christ is the official anointed of the Messiah. It is the equivalent of the Old Testament (Mashiach) and thus means the anointed one. Kings and priests were regularly anointed during the old dispensation #Exodus_29:7; #Leviticus_4:3; #Judges_9:8; #1_Samuel_9:16; #1_Samuel_10:1; #2_Samuel_19:10). The King was called the anointed of Jehovah #1_Samuel_24:10" ( 315).

"Christ was set up or appointed to His offices from eternity, but historically His anointing took place when The Holy Spirit # Luke_1:35 conceived him; #Matthew_3:16; #Mark_1:10; #Luke_3:22; #John_1:32; #John_3:34" (316).

### Son of Man

The Son of Man is mentioned in the Old Testament, as seen in #Psalm_8:4 and Daniel.

- Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.

Jesus "applies the name to Himself on more than forty occasions, while others all but refrained from employing it" (316).

- Bavinck, Herman. Reformed Dogmatics: Abridged in One Volume. Grand Rapids, MI: Baker Academic, 2011.

"Jesus thus reveals (1) that he is not just the Son of David and King of Israel but the Son of Man, connected with all humans and giving his life as a ransom for many; (2) that he occupies an utterly unique place among all humans, because as the one who descended from above, lived in constant communion with the Father, and had power to forgive sins, to bestow eternal life; (3) that he could not grasp this power by violence, as the Jews expected their Messiah to do, but that as the Servant of Lord, he had to suffer and die for his people; and (4) that precisely by taking this road would attain to that glory of the resurrection and the ascension, the elevation to God's right hand, and the coming again for judgement" (406-07).

- Brewer, Thomas. editor. Table Talk Magazine: Stewardship. Sanford, FL: Ligonier Ministries, 2025.

"We know that the Scriptures give many titles to Jesus, but the title Son of Man is one that Jesus Himself seemed to have preferred above all others, at least during His earthly ministry. In terms of frequency, New Testament scholars have noted that Jesus use the title Son of Man for Himself more than any other titles. Plainly, He wants us to know that there is something significant about this title for understanding His mission" (32).

### Son of God

- Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.

"Jesus appropriates the name, and others also ascribe it to Him. The name is applied to Jesus in four different senses, which are not always kept distinct in Scripture but are sometimes combined. The name is used for Him:

- In the official or Messianic sense, as a description of the office rather than of the nature of Christ.

- In the trinitarian sense, the name is sometimes used to denote the essential deity of Christ. As such, it points to a pre-existent sonship, which transcends the human life of Christ and HIs official calling as Messiah.

- In the nativistic sense. Christ is also called the Son of God in virtue of His supernatural birth. The name is so applied to Him in the well-known passage in the Gospel of Luke, in which the origin of HIs human nature is ascribed to the direct, supernatural paternity of God, namely, #Luke_1:35.

- In the ethno-religious sense. In this sense, the name "sons" or "children of God" is applied to believers in the New Testament.

- The name Lord is applied to God in the Septuagint and the New Testament, we find a somewhat similar threefold application of the name of Christ, as a polite and respectful form of address #Matthew_8:2; #Matthew_20:33 and an expression of ownership and authority, without implying anything as to Christ's divine character and authority" (317-18).

- Macleod, Donald. The Person of Christ: Contours of Christian Theology. Downers Grove, IL: InterVarsity Press, 1998.

"Jesus speaks of his sonship in the synoptics, but it disappears in John. It is central to his whole purpose, as he himself acknowledges: these are written that you may believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God" (71).

"The acknowledgment of Jesus as my beloved Son in the synoptic accounts of the baptism and the transfiguration probably echoes the description of Isaac in #Genesis_22:2" (72).

"In the beginning, he was already in being. He is the eternal Son. The Son is distinguished from the Spirit in that he is Son, and he is distinguished from other sons (angels and men) in that he alone is eternal and uncreated. Christ is Son by nature, human beings only by adoption "(73).

"As the pre-existent Son he was already equal with God #Philemon_2:6 and shared his glory #John_17:5. But there is another authority which is given to him #Matthew_28:18; #John_17:2" ( 87).