## What is theology?

- Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.

"There was little or no attempt in the first two centuries of the Christian era to systematically present the whole body of doctrinal truth gathered from the Word of God. Yet the urge of the human mind to see the truth as much as possible could not long be suppressed. Man is endowed with reason, and the human reason cannot rest satisfied with a mere collection of separate truths but wants to see them in their mutual relationship, so that it may have a clearer understanding of them" (3).

"God certainly sees the truth as a whole, and the theologian must think the truths of God after Him" (3).

"We start the study of theology with two presuppositions, namely that God exists and that He has revealed Himself in His divine word" (3).

- Parsons, Burke, editor. Table Talk Magazine: Death. Sanford, FL: Ligonier Ministries, 2025.

"God is God, and we are not. There is a qualitative difference between the Creator and His creation, between God and that which depends on Him for its existence. Scripture emphasizes the Creator-creature distinction in numerous places, including Numbers 23:19, where the Lord highlights a fundamental distinction between God and humanity: human beings can change. They can fail to fulfill their promises, but God can't do so" (32).

- Gentry, Peter J, and Stephen J. Wellum. God's Kingdom through God's Covenant: A Concise Biblical Theology. Wheaton, IL: Crossway, 2015.

"Theology is the first step in drawing legitimate theological conclusions from Scripture and thus applying the whole counsel of God to our lives, which is the task of Systematic Theology" (20).

"Theology is not only the formulation of doctrine but also its defense in light of specific challenges, thus helping the church to know and proclaim the whole plan of God (Acts 20:27) for God's glory and the church's good" (535).

- Bray, Gerald. The Doctrine of God: Contours of Christian Theology. Downers Grove, IL: InterVarsity Press, 1993.

"That theology was necessary was demonstrated by the proliferation of heretics who were unable to discern the hidden truth of the Scriptures, and by the simple-mindedness of ordinary believers who were easily led astray" (64).

- Horton, Michael. God's Promises: Introducing Covenant Theology. Grand Rapids, MI: Baker Academic, 2006.

"Theology simply means the study of God, and doctrine means teaching. Since the main message of Scripture is the unfolding mystery of Christ, who reveals himself as Father and reconciles us to him, theology is a central concern of every believer" (Horton, The Christian Faith, 2011: 13).

- Vos, Geerhardus. Biblical Theology. Grand Rapids, MI: NA, 1948.

"Theology is the science concerning God" (4).

"From the definition of Theology as the science concerning God follows the necessity of its being based on revelation. For who among men knoweth the things of a man, save the spirit of man which is in him? Even so, the things of God none knoweth, save the Spirit of God (1 Corinthians 2:11). The inward hidden content of God's mind can become the possession of man only through a voluntary disclosure on God's part" (4).

## The Nature of Dogmas

### Dogma Identified

- Parsons, Burke, editor. Table Talk Magazine: Death. Sanford, FL: Ligonier Ministries, 2025.

"God is God, and we are not. There is a qualitative difference between the Creator and His creation, between God and that which depends on Him for its existence. Scripture emphasizes the Creator-creature distinction in numerous places, including Numbers 23:19, where the Lord highlights a fundamental distinction between God and humanity: human beings can change. They can fail to fulfill their promises, but God can't do so."

- Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.

"Systematic Theology or Dogmatics deals with the dogmata, the accepted doctrines of the Church" (6).

"The word 'dogma' is derived from the Greek verb *dogma. In classical Greek, the expression " moi " meant not only, it seems to me, or I think, but also, I have concluded, I am certain, " and " it is my conviction" (6).

"While a dogma might in the abstract be a mere private opinion, in common parlance, it was generally regarded as an axiomatic or self-evident truth, an official ordinance, or a well-founded and formulated article of belief" (6).

"All dogmata have this in common, that they are clothed with a certain authority" (6).

"The Roman Catholic Church developed the specific conception of dogmas; dogma has come to be regarded as a revealed truth which an infallible teaching authority has in some way defined, and as such is proposed to the acceptance of the faithful. Such a truth does not necessarily need to be revealed in Scripture; it may also be revealed in oral tradition. [...] The Reformers and Protestant Theology, in general, broke with the hierarchical view and regarded dogmas as divine truths, clearly revealed in the Word of God, formulated by some competent Church body, and regarded as authoritative because they are derived from the Word of God" (7).

"A notable change came about through Friedrich Schleiermacher, who veered from the objective to the subjective in his conception of the source of dogmas. He considered Christian experience as their source; he saw in them the intellectual expressions, authorized by the Church, of the inner meaning of the religious experiences of the Christian community" (7).

"Alan Ritschl's Theology pretends to be more objective in its conception of dogmas, but is, as a matter of fact, just as subjective. It regards dogmas as the scientific affirmations of the faith of the Church, that is, not of the contents of this faith, but of that which is involved in it" (8).

"Karl Barth distinguishes between dogma in the singular and dogmas in the plural. He defines dogma as a Church proclamation that agrees with the Bible as the Word of God. He speaks of it as the agreement of Church proclamation with the revelation attested in Holy Scripture. This revelation should not be regarded as a doctrinal proposition but as divine action, as a behest or decree, calling for action on man's part" (8).

- DeYoung, Kevin. Daily Doctrine. Wheaton, IL: Crossway, 2025.

"Christian theology aims to know, enjoy, and walk in the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus. The word theology comes from two Greek words: theos, meaning "God," and logos, meaning "word," "speech," or "statement." Most simply, theology is God's study (7).

"William Perkins defined theology as 'the Science of living blessedly forever, and Petrus van Maastricht called theology the doctrine of living unto God through Christ" (7).

- Gentry, Peter J, and Stephen J. Wellum. God's Kingdom through God's Covenant: A Concise Biblical Theology. Wheaton, IL: Crossway, 2015.

"Biblical Theology is the hermeneutical discipline that seeks to do justice to what Scripture claims to be and what it is. Scripture claims to be God's Word written; it is a unified revelation of his gracious plan of redemption. It is a progressive unfolding of God's plan, rooted in history and developed along a specific storyline primarily demarcated by the biblical covenants. Biblical Theology as a hermeneutical discipline attempts to exegete texts in their own context and then, in light of the entire Canon, to examine the unfolding nature of God's plan and carefully think through the relationship between before and after that plan, which culminates in Christ" (23).

- Bavinck, Herman. Reformed Dogmatics: Abridged in One Volume. Grand Rapids, MI: Baker Academic, 2011.

"The word dogma, from the Greek dokein, denotes that which is definite and has been decided and is fixed. There are various dogmas based on different authorities. Dogmas, articles of faith, are only those truths properly outlined in Scripture as things to be believed. Among Reformed theologians, therefore, the principles into which all theological dogma is distilled are Deus dixit--God has said it" (4-5).

"Theology is a Science about God, not about Religion or faith. The aim of theology is nothing other than that the rational creature know God, and knowing him glorify him (Prov 16:4; Rom 11:36; 1 Cor 8:6; Col 3:17)" (49).

### The Formal Characteristics of Dogmas

- Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.

Dogmas have three characteristics:

1. Their subject matter is derived from scripture.
"The Bible is God's Word, the book which is His continuous revelation of redemption for all successive generations" (9).

"According to our Reformed conception, the Bible does not contain dogmas but does contain the doctrinal truths that they embody. Doctrinal propositions, which are not derived from the Word of God, can never become ecclesiastical dogmas" (9).

"Roman Catholic Church speaks of dogmas in the strict sense of the word as truths contained in the Word of God, written or unwritten, and proposed by the Church for the faithful's belief. The Vatican Council expresses itself as follows: 'Further all those things Christian theology aim and Catholic faith which are contained in the Word of God, written or handed down, and which the Church, either by a solemn judgment or by her ordinary and universal magisterium, proposes for belief as having been divinely revealed" (9).

"Dogmas are not mere repetitions of Scripture statements, but careful, albeit human and therefore fallible, formulations of doctrines contained in the Word of God. Their subject matter is derived from Holy Writ" (10).

"Dogmas are not the object, but the expression of faith" (11).

2. Dogmas are the fruit of dogmatic reflection.
"The Church does not find her dogmas in finished form on the pages of Holy Writ, but obtains them by reflecting on the truths revealed in the Word of God" (11).

"All the faculties of his soul and all the movements of his inner life contribute to the final result. Broader still, it is not merely the individual Christian, but rather the Church of God as a whole, under the guidance of the Holy Spirit, that is the subject of this reflective activity" (11).

"It calls for deep spirituality, for religious fervor, for willing subjection to the truth as it is revealed in the Word of God, for a consuming passion for gaining an ever-increasing insight into the truth in all its bearings, for diligent exegetical study, and constructive ability" (12).

3. A competent ecclesiastical body officially defines dogmas.
"Dogma must have attached to it an idea of collectivity and an idea of authority" (12).

"Dogmas are deliverances concerning faith, sustained by ecclesiastical authority" (13).

- Wellum, Stephen. Systematic Theology Volume I. Brentwood, TN: B&H Academic Publishing, 2024.

"Think first about the triune Creator-covenant Lord who is the foundation for truth, knowledge, and theology. It almost sounds like a truism, but it is not; the grounded truth is the God of Scripture, not a generic theism or monotheistic conception of God" (86).

### The Necessity of Dogma

- Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.

"Scripture represents the truth as essential to Christianity. Christianity is a way of life founded on a message. The gospel is the self-revelation of God in Christ, which comes to us in the form of truth. That truth is revealed not only in the Person and work of Christ but also in the interpretation of these found in the Bible. And it is only by a proper understanding and a believing acceptance of the gospel's message, that men are brought to the necessary self-surrender to Christ in faith, and are made partakers of the new life in the Spirit" (17).

"Jesus stressed the truth (Matthew 29:20; John 14:26; 16:1-15; 17:3, 17) and the apostles were very much in earnest about it (Romans 2:8, 2 Corinthians 4:2; Galatians 1:8; 3:1; Philippians 1:15-18; 2 Thessalonians 1:10; 2:10, 12, 13; 1 Timothy 6:5; 2 Timothy 2:15, 4:4; 2 Peter 1:3, 4, 19-21; 1 John 2:20-22; 5:20). They who minimize the significance of the truth, and therefore ignore and neglect it, will finally come to the discovery that they have very little Christianity left" (18).

"The unity of the Church demands doctrinal agreement. In Ephesians 4, Paul stresses the unity of the Church of God and indicates the ideal that its members all attain the unity of the knowledge of the Son of God" (18).

"They should be of one accord and one mind. He considers this so important that he hurls his anathema at those who preach a gospel different from that which he has preached, and even insists on the exclusion of heretical persons" (18)

--> The apostle Paul is admonishing the Corinthian church, they should "all speak the same."

"Unity in the knowledge of the truth is regarded as of the greatest importance to the well-being of the Church. Let us set aside doctrine and come together by working together. Unity in doctrine, therefore, involves the confession of a common dogma" (19).

"Religious dogmas are not the product of individual Christians, but of the Church as a whole. The personal reflection of the individual Christian thus gains the advantage of collective control, and the confidence which he may have in his findings is naturally greatly strengthened by the fact that thousands of others reach the same conclusion" (20).

- Wellum, Stephen. Systematic Theology Volume I. Brentwood, TN: B&H Academic Publishing, 2024.

"First, theology requires that we apply God's word. This not only assumes that Scripture, as God's word written, is foundational for our theology, but also that a right reading of Scripture is central to the practice of theology. The Bible is more than a collection of isolated texts from ancient history. Scripture is God's unfolding revelation of his eternal plan that moves from creation to the new creation, centered in the coming of Christ" (8).

"From the opening verses of Scripture, God is presented in a category all by himself: he alone is uncreated, independent, self-contained, self-sufficient, the holy One who creates and rules all things by his word. This truth establishes the central discussion of all theology: the Creator-creature distinction, which eliminates any pantheistic or panentheistic views of God-world relationship: God alone is God" (86).

"As Creator and Lord, God rules with perfect power, knowledge, and righteousness. As the God who knows and plans everything according to his will, he is the source and standard of truth. God has created humans to know him and a world that reflects his universal, comprehensive plan. All creation is revelatory of him, and humans can't function except within the environment of revelation" (86).

"As covenant Lord, God acts in, with, and through his creatures to accomplish his plan and purposes" (86).

Dogma is essential to Systematic Theology because it provides the authoritative foundation for theological reflection. Without dogma—defined doctrines accepted and affirmed by the church, systematic theology would lack structure and coherence. Dogma is the boundary of orthodoxy, distinguishing truth from error and ensuring continuity with historic Christian belief. Furthermore, its authoritative and unifying nature allows theology to be more than just an individual interpretation; it becomes a shared confession of faith that shapes doctrine and practice. By engaging with dogma, systematic theology organizes biblical truth and defends it against distortion, ensuring that theology remains faithful to divine revelation.

## The History of Dogmatics

- Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.

"The history of Dogmatics does not go back to the time of the Apostles, but only to the beginning of the third century, when Origen wrote his Peri Archon. Several periods may be distinguished, namely, the period of the Old Catholic Church, the period of the Middle Ages, and the period of the Reformation, the period of Protestant Scholasticism, the Period of Rationalism and Supranationalism, and the period of modern theology (B69)."

### The Period of the Old Catholic Church

- Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.

"The catechetical school of Alexandria did preparatory work" (69).

Origen was the first to develop a system of theology. His work was written bout the year 281 AD. He attempts to transform the doctrine of the Church into a speculative science, acceptable to the cultural and philosophical classes of his day" (69).

Augustine of Hippo's work is derived from three Pauline virtues: faith, hope, and love. Under the first heading, the author discusses the main article of faith; under the second, the doctrine of prayer, following the order of the six petitions of the Lord's prayer, and under the third, all kinds of moral questions" (69-70).

John of Damascus was characterized by a dialectical activity, especially in theology. The first centuries were rather barren, but towards the end of the tenth century, a scientific awakening emerged. From here, the period of the Old Catholic Church movies to the Middle Ages. And by the 11th century, Scholastic Theology arose, in the 12th century, Mysticism appeared (70).

### The Period of the Middle Ages

- Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.

See the latter on John of Damascus and how his work relates to the Middle Ages period.

"Anselm of Canterbury was characterized at once by deep piety and great intellectual acuteness and penetration. He did not produce a comprehensive systematic exposition of theology; he wrote several works of great dogmatic value" (71).

"Thomas Aquinas is undoubtedly the greatest of the Schoolmen. His Summa totius theogiae covers in three volumes nearly the whole field of Dogmatics" (72).

### The Period of the Reformation

- Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.

"The theology of the Reformation is characterized by the social prominence given to the absolute normative authority of Scripture, and by the strong emphasis on the doctrine of justification by faith only" (72).

### Catholic Agreement: A Brief History

- Wellum, Stephen. Systematic Theology Volume I. Brentwood, TN: B&H Academic Publishing, 2024.

The dogmatic formulation of the ecumenical councils was warranted by the Church's commitment to Scripture as God's first-order word-revelation. The confession of the Trinity, the deity of Christ, and the incarnation were not viewed as departures from Scripture, but faithful expositions of it" (36).

1. Authority - is derived from the tradition of the church, which includes Scripture and the decisions of the seven ecumenical councils.

2. The Triune God and Christology - Nicene trinitarianism and Chalcedonian Christology are affirmed. But the East rejects the West's addition of the filioque clause, which speaks of the Spirit proceeding from the Father and the Son.

3. Sin - is viewed differently than in the West, specifically in contrast to Augustinian and Reformed Theology. Adam does not function as our covenant head, nor is his sin imputed to us" (37).

4. Salvation - since sin's effects are not total, the application of Christ's work to us is more synergistic than monergistic. In salvation, Christ's atonement is substitutionary, but is not understood as penal substitution.

5. The Church