## The Idea of Dogmatic Theology

### The Relation of Dogmas to Dogmatics

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.</mark>

"The very name Dogmatics suggests a very close relation. It is derived from the singular dogma rather than the plural dogmata, and as such, points to the fact that it deals not merely with certain separate dogmas, but with the dogma of the Church as a whole. Dogmatics systematically deals with the doctrinal truths of Scripture, particularly with that truth as the Church confesses it" (25).

"It studies the doctrine of the Church as a whole and considers each article of faith in its relation to the whole. It is not only scriptural, but it must be this first of all and bears an ecclesiastical imprint" (25).

"Friedrich Schleiermacher does not acknowledge its derivation from Scripture but agrees with it in its representation of dogmas as the subject matter of Dogmatics. According to him, dogmatic theology is the science of the doctrine professed by a Christian Church at a given moment of its historical development" (25).

"Alan Ritschl's view of the relation between god and Dogmatics is not different from that of Schleiermacher" (25).

"Doctrine is the truth about dogma, dogmas expanded, it is secondary theology, or the Church's grapes--as in the creeds. Theology is a doctrine in the making" (26).

"Theology is tentative doctrine; doctrine is selected theology" ( 26).

## The Object of Dogmatic Theology (Its Definition)

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.</mark>

"God teaches theology, teaches God, and leads unto God. This is more in harmony with the word's etymology as it represents God as the object of theology. But some have objected to this because we can't have a perfect God on earth" (30).

"The men who have used this definition were generally quite careful to point out that they did not have in mind the knowledge which God has of himself (archetypal knowledge) but the knowledge which man has of God in virtue of His self-revelation (ectypal knowledge)."

"Theology is the science of God and divine things; or of God and His relations to the universe, or God as HE is in Himself and as he is related to all His creatures" (30).

"God is the object of faith, not subject" (30).

"Theology as a science deals with the knowledge of God, seeks to appropriate and assimilate its various data, to represent them in their grand unity, and to cast them into a form that satisfies the human consciousness, and can be called theology only in so far as it depends on insight into the knowledge of God." (33).

"He has revealed Himself in His word. It is assumed (a) that God has revealed Himself and thus conveyed true knowledge of Himself to man; (b) that man, created in the image of God, is capable of appropriating and apprehending this divine truth; and (c) that man has an urge within him to systematize this knowledge with the view to a better understanding of God and of His relations to His creatures" (35).

"Theology is the systematized knowledge of God, or who, through whom, and unto whom, are all things" (3).

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">DeYoung, Kevin. Daily Doctrine. Wheaton, IL: Crossway, 2025.</mark>

"Archetypal refers to God's knowledge of himself. This is the theology only available to God. On the other hand, ectypal theology is knowledge fashioned by God from his archetype and then communicated by grace to his creators. This is a key point: only God makes true theology possible" (9-10).

"Ecctypal theology can be communicated in three ways: by union, vision, or revelation. The first is the theology of Christ as the God-man. The second is the theology of spiritual beings and glorified saints in heaven. The third is the theology of human beings on earth" (10).

"Dogma refers to a doctrine of the church--the mature fruit of the church's reflection on Scripture--while systematic speaks to how doctrine is studied" (8).

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Gentry, Peter J, and Stephen J. Wellum. God's Kingdom through God's Covenant: A Concise Biblical Theology. Wheaton, IL: Crossway, 2015.</mark>

"Systematic theology goes further than Biblical Theology, since it involves the application of Scripture to all areas of life. It inevitably involves theological construction and doctrinal formulation, grounded in biblical theology and informed by historical theology. Still, it also involves interacting with all areas of life--history, science, psychology, ethics, and so on" (24).

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Grudem, Wayne. Systematic Theology. Grand Rapids, MI: Zondervan Academic. 2020.</mark>

"Systematic theology is any study that answers the question of what the Bible teaches us today about any given topic. This definition suggests that systematic theology involves collecting and understanding all relevant Bible passages on various topics, and then clearly summarizing their teachings so that we know what to believe about each topic. However, it is important to state at once that the study of church history and the study of philosophy can often be a great benefit in helping us understand what the whole Bible teaches about various topics" (1)

Dogmatic theology is not merely a collection of abstract doctrines but a disciplined study of divine truth revealed and confessed by the church. It seeks to articulate the essential beliefs of Christianity with clarity, authority, and coherence, ensuring that theology remains faithful to Scripture and the historical writings of the church. However, to properly engage in dogmatic theology, one must consider its relationship to other fields of knowledge, particularly  [[1.03 Science and Religion|Science]]. Like the natural and philosophical sciences, theology operates within its own task, method, principles, and sources, requiring careful organization and systematization. This leads naturally to a discussion on the Task, Method, and Distribution of Dogmatics, exploring how theological inquiry is structured and interacts with other disciplines to pursue truth.

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Wellum, Stephen. Systematic Theology Volume I. Brentwood, TN: B&H Academic Publishing, 2024.</mark>

"The supreme bonum of knowledge is the knowledge of God. All human knowledge, whether in creation or Scripture, is grounded in God's speech and self-disclosure. For humans to know anything, we depend on God's initiative to make himself known to us" (5).

"Systematic theology is the orderly, comprehensive study of the triune God and all things related to him. Theology is that science which treats God in himself and his relations to humans and the world" (6).

