## Science

- Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.

"Theology was once generally recognized as the queen of the sciences, but does not enjoy that distinction today" (35).

"The Scholastics, in general, stressed the scientific character of theology and treated it as such; and in the theological work of the Reformation and post-Reformation periods, it is also fully recognized. Especially since the end of the eighteenth century, the right of theology to be called science was questioned and even positively denied. This was due in part to Immanuel Kant's criticism of the faculty of knowledge, according to which it is impossible to obtain any theoretical knowledge of God and the supersensible in general, and in part to the pretentious claim of the natural sciences to be the only science worthy of the name" (35).

- Wellum, Stephen. Systematic Theology Volume I. Brentwood, TN: B&H Academic Publishing, 2024.

"[[1.02 Systematic Theology]] has been viewed as the queen of science. As the queen, she is a beautiful capstone and culmination of all disciplines, especially theological ones. Properly understood, theology is the study of the triune God, who is our Creator and Lord and thus the standard of all knowledge and truth (Proverbs 1:7; Isaiah 46:8-10; Romans 11:33-36)" (4-5).

- Bavinck, Herman. Reformed Dogmatics: Abridged in One Volume. Grand Rapids, MI: Baker Academic, 2011.

"Science aims at truth, and if dogmatic theology aims to be real science, it cannot be satisfied with description for what is but must demonstrate what necessarily has to be considered truth" ( 7).

"Pure objectivity, a science without any presuppositions, is impossible for all research, even in the physical or natural science" (13).

"Religion and faith must precede theological reflection; the theologians must be a person of faith, and the first theological step for a person of faith is to acknowledge revelation" (13).

While science and [[1.01 Theology|theology]] seek to understand reality, they do so through different means--science through empirical observation and experimentation, and theology through [the Principium Cognoscendi Externum (Revelation)](onenote:https://d.docs.live.net/fc52dea27c35b98d/Documents/Reformed%20Dogmatics/Prolegomena/2%20The%20Doctrine%20of%20Scripture.one#2.02%20The%20Principium%20Cognoscendi%20Externum%20\(Revelation\)&section-id={C315ECD8-D624-A640-B0B2-4D8ACA0EFF31}&page-id={6F403E49-F810-FE47-B22A-C5760FDC4F97}&end) and [[1.02 Systematic Theology|systematic theology]]. Yet, science alone cannot answer the more profound questions of meaning, morality, and ultimate purpose. This is where religion enters the discussion. Religion, as the lived expression of faith, provides the foundation for theology, offering structure and coherence to belief. However, theology is not merely an articulation of religious experiences; it is a disciplined endeavor that requires [[1.04 Task, Method, and Distribution of Dogmatics|task, method, and distribution of dogmatics]] to interpret and systematize divine truth faithfully.

## Religion

- DeYoung, Kevin. Daily Doctrine. Wheaton, IL: Crossway, 2025.

"The etymology of the word religion is unclear. Over the years, many have agreed with Cicero, who derived religion from release, a Latin word meaning "to gather together" or "to reread." Religio comes from Religare, meaning to fasten or to bind. With this etymology, religion is the binding or reattachment of man to God" (11).

- Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.

"It presupposes that God exists, as He has revealed Himself, and that He has enabled man to appropriate this revelation" (93).

"The earliest of these is that of Cicero, who derived it from re-legere, to re-read, to repeat, to observe. In the light of this derivation, religion was regarded as a constant and diligent observance of all that pertains to the knowledge of the gods" (93).

"The religio subjection corresponds to the religio objectiva and is described in the Old Testament as the fear of the Lord, which is repeatedly called the beginning of wisdom" (95).

See the [Belgic Confession](https://prts.edu/wp-content/uploads/2016/12/Belgic-Confession-of-Faith-with-Intro.pdf) and [Canons of Dort](https://www.crcna.org/welcome/beliefs/confessions/canons-dort) Articles III and IV.

Thomas Aquinas defines religion as "the virtue by which men render the required services and honor to God." Thus, religion is among the human virtues and is practically identified as the single element of latreia. He distinguishes between theological virtues, faith, hope, and charity, which have God for their object, and the moral virtues, justice, fortitude, prudence, and temperance, which find their object in the things that lead us to God" (97).

Scholastics played a critical role in shaping systematic theology, particularly its categorization method, local argumentation, and doctrinal precision. Scholastic thought's relationship between faith and reason helped shape theological discussions about natural theology, Divine Simplicity, and metaphysics. See [the properties of God](onenote:https://d.docs.live.net/fc52dea27c35b98d/Documents/Reformed%20Dogmatics/Theology%20Proper/5%20The%20Properties%20of%20God.one#5.01%20The%20Properties%20\(or%20Attributes\)%20of%20God&section-id={DEF58F85-167D-694E-ACA4-771A4561A9B2}&page-id={63A253D2-E038-3D42-BDB0-6F03651B4629}&end) for more about His attributes.

- Wellum, Stephen. Systematic Theology Volume I. Brentwood, TN: B&H Academic Publishing, 2024.

"Reason has always played a crucial role in theology, as evidenced in the work of Athanasius of Alexander, Augustine of Hippo, Anselm of Canterbury, Thomas Aquinas, and so on. In the Enlightenment, however, reason was elevated from a ministerial instrument to a magisterial rule, especially over Scripture and tradition" (43).

- Bavinck, Herman. Reformed Dogmatics: Abridged in One Volume. Grand Rapids, MI: Baker Academic, 2011.

"The word dogma is sometimes employed in a broader, and then again in a more restricted, sense. Sometimes it denotes the Christian religion as a whole, including the articles of faith drawn from Scripture and the rites and ceremonies of the church. As a rule, however, the word is used in a more restricted sense for the doctrines of the church, for the articles of faith that are based on the Word of God and therefore obligate everyone to faith. Dogmatic theology, then, is the system of the article of faith" (6).

While religion provides the lived experience and communal expression of faith, [[1.01 Theology|theology]] seeks to systematize and articulate that faith with clarity and coherence. However, theology is not merely a human construction; it depends on an authoritative source of knowledge—a principium, or foundational principle, from which all theological reflection derives. This brings us to [the Principium Cognoscendi Externum (Revelation)](onenote:https://d.docs.live.net/fc52dea27c35b98d/Documents/Reformed%20Dogmatics/Prolegomena/2%20The%20Doctrine%20of%20Scripture.one#2.02%20The%20Principium%20Cognoscendi%20Externum%20\(Revelation\)&section-id={C315ECD8-D624-A640-B0B2-4D8ACA0EFF31}&page-id={6F403E49-F810-FE47-B22A-C5760FDC4F97}&end), the external principle of knowledge, which refers to divine revelation as the objective source of all theological truth. Unlike religion, which cultural and historical factors can shape, the principium cognoscenti externum provides a fixed and authoritative foundation upon which theology rests. In Scripture, as God’s revealed word, theology finds its source and its standard. Therefore, to engage in dogmatic theology properly, we must first establish the nature and role of divine revelation as the principium cognoscendi externum.