A hermeneutical framework is a structured approach or set of guiding principles for interpreting Scripture. It provides a lens through which biblical texts are read, understood, and applied. These frameworks help determine how different parts of the Bible relate to one another, how theological themes develop, and how historical and cultural contexts influence meanings.

There are key aspects of hermeneutical frameworks, which include:

1. Interpretive Principles - the rules or methods used to understand Scripture (literal vs. allegorical)
2. Theological Presuppositions - assumptions about God, salvation, and the nature of Scripture that shape our interpretation.
3. Continuity vs. Discontinuity - whether the Old and New Testaments are seen as continuous. Covenant Theology is considered a distinct period with different divine administrations (See [[3.04 Dispensationalism|Dispensationalism]]).
4. Use of Historical Context - How much emphasis is placed on biblical texts' cultural, linguistic, and historical background?
5. Relationship between law and gospel: How the Old Testament law is understood in relation to Christ and the New Testament.

A hermeneutical framework affects doctrine, preaching, and theological discussions. For example, someone using Covenant Theology might see baptism as a sign of the covenant that includes infants' pedobaptism, whereas someone using Dispensationalism might see baptism as only for professing believers' credobaptism.

- Horton, Michael. God's Promises: Introducing Covenant Theology. Grand Rapids, MI: Baker Academic, 2006.

[[3.02 Covenantalism|Covenantalism]]naturally arises from the ordinary reading of the Scripture from Genesis to Revelation. We need a framework that Scripture provides us; otherwise, we will serve the whim of our assumptions about what should or should not be true, given our starting point. Covenant theology also emphasizes the unity of the human and nonhuman creation, without erasing the differences. The covenant of creation places humanity in a privileged position to conserve and shepherd the rest of God's creatures for his glory and their good ends, our atheistic culture knows of no obligations to a sovereign God that stands over our ambitions and drives" (14-16).

- Renihan, Samuel. The Mystery of Christ: His Covenant and His Kingdom. Cape Coral, FL: Founders Press, 2020.

"God institutes covenants and does not arise from any natural state; our Knowledge and understanding of them must wholly depend upon [[2.04 The Principium Cognoscendi Internum|the principium cognoscendi internum]], seeing the nature of them in such as transduce common principles of reason and natural light" (19).

"The law and the gospel are two opposite paths to a righteous standing before God; a perfect record of personal obedience, or a perfect record of imputed obedience" (20).

- DeYoung, Kevin. Daily Doctrine. Wheaton, IL: Crossway, 2025.

"Covenant should be a central theme in any [[1.02 Systematic Theology|systematic theology]]" (133).

"JI Packer argues that covenantal theology is a hermeneutic, a way of reading the whole Bible" (133).

- Allison, Gregg. Sojourners and Strangers: The Doctrine of the Church. Wheaton, IL: Crossway: 2012.

"Scripture features several such covenants, all of which possess common characteristics: covenants (1) are unilateral; (2) create or formalize a structured relationship between God and his covenant partners; (3) feature binding obligations; and (4) involve covenantal signs or the swearing of oaths" (64).

See the discussions on [[3.04 Dispensationalism|Dispensationalism]], [[3.02 Covenantalism| Covenantalism]], and [[3.03 Progressive Covenantalism|Progressive Covenantalism]] here.

## Creation, Fall, Redemption, and New Creation

- Wellum, Stephen. Systematic Theology Volume I. Brentwood, TN: B&H Academic Publishing, 2024.

"The Bible is a larger book containing many topics, diverse literature, and centuries. However, given that Scripture is God's word written, despite being written by multiple authors and addressing various subjects, it is one grand metanarrative whose central message is about what our triune Creator-covenant God planned in eternity and executed in time to glorify Himself by the of his people, the judgment of sin and the making all things new in Christ Jesus" (393).

"A significant way Christians have captured the overall framework of Scripture is by thinking through the Bible's plot movements: creation, fall, redemption, and new creation. This wide-angle lens shapes the Bible's metanarrative and holds together all the smaller parts and stories" (395).

- Renihan, Samuel. The Mystery of Christ: His Covenant and His Kingdom. Cape Coral, FL: Founders Press, 2020.

"The virtue of being a creature, man owes complete obedience to God. By being Creator, God is owed man's complete obedience. God does not owe a reward to man for his obedience" (13).

- Hamilton, James M. What is Biblical Theology? A Guide to the Story, Symbolism, and Pattern, Wheaton, IL: Crossway Publishing, 2014.

"In broadest terms, the Bible's plot can be summarized in four words: creation, fall, redemption, and restoration" (31).

- Hays, Gary Edward and Mark L. Strauss, Ed. The Pentateuch: Life in the Presence of God. Brentwood, TN: B&H Academic: 2004.

"From Genesis 22 to Revelation 22, the Bible is about how God works to restore the relationship. At the end of the story, we see God's people back in a garden, enjoying the blessings of God's presence once again (Revelation 22)" (5).

### Creation

- Wellum, Stephen. Systematic Theology Volume I. Brentwood, TN: B&H Academic Publishing, 2024.

"It is impossible to overestimate the magnitudes of the doctrine of creation for theology and the Christian worldview. Many Christians are naturally interested in the doctrine of salvation. However, creation is not only where the Bible's story begins; it is also foundational to all theological formulations. The Christian worldview is not fully understood as described in the Bible without a proper theology of creation. Creation establishes a unique theistic, covenantal. And eschatological framework by which we understand God, self, and the world with the glorious God of Scripture as the ground and foundation" (398).

"The Bible's story begins with creation ex nihilo by the sovereign/absolute-personal God--the triune covenant Lord. From the opening verses of Scripture, we discover that the true living God is categorically different in existence and nature than his creation: he alone is eternal, uncreated, independent, the Holy One who creates and rules all things by his word--the God who speaks and calls all things into existence" (398).

Scripture speaks of the triune God in himself, ad intra, apart from creation, and then, due to God's decision to create, God about the world, ad extra. But before a universe existed, God existed in total perfection, blessedness, and shared love and communion. God is not correlative to the world and dependent on it" (399).

"As God creates and relates to his creation, he does so as Creator and Lord. As Creator and Lord, he is fully present with us; he freely, purposely, and personally sustains and governs all things to his desired end. God has created humans to know him in a covenant relationship and created the world to reveal his design, purposes, and glory" (401).

Creation first identifies the unique God of the Bible in all of his glory and splendor. God's identity as the triune Creator-Covenant Lord gives a specific theistic shape to Scripture's theological framework, which is foundational for all doctrinal formation" (402).

- Poythress, Vern. Biblical Typology: How the Old Testament Points to Christ, His Church, and the Consummation. Wheaton, IL: Crossway, 2024.

"Romans 5:14 says that Adam was a type of the one who was to come. The word type, as used here, does not have its later technical meaning; it means an example or an instance of a pattern" (173).

- Hays, Gary Edward and Mark L. Strauss, Ed. The Pentateuch: Life in the Presence of God. Brentwood, TN: B&H Academic: 2004.

"The opening verses, Genesis 1:1, are a vital foundational declaration that undergirds all of reality. God, in his sovereignty, created the universe. Standing at the beginning of Scripture, this proclamation and the implications of this statement echo throughout the rest of Scripture" (25).

### Fall

- Wellum, Stephen. Systematic Theology Volume I. Brentwood, TN: B&H Academic Publishing, 2024.

"The second plot movement of the Bible's metanarrative and theological framework is the fall. Every worldview must explain the nature of the human problem, and significantly, the answer is always tied to one understanding of creation/origins" (414).

"Thus, in Adam, humanity moved from an original state of goodness to our present fallen or abnormal state. On this point, the Bible's explanation of the human problem categorically differs from non-Christian thought. Conversely, the Bible's solution to the problem is also categorically different. Why? For this reason, since our problem is not tied to our creation but to a historical, moral choice, sin and evil may be vanquished and perfectly eliminated" (415).

"Apart from a historical fall, the responsibility for our sin and evil is ultimately traced back to our Creator, who made us flawed from the outset. However, Scripture teaches, in no uncertain terms, that God created humans and the world good. All that is evil is not the Creator's fault, but tied to the responsibility of the creature, both human and angelic" (415).

- Hays, Gary Edward and Mark L. Strauss, Ed. The Pentateuch: Life in the Presence of God. Brentwood, TN: B&H Academic: 2004.

"Genesis 3-11 provides an overview recounting the ways people rebel against God and thus experience death, separation from God's presence, and a scattering across the ancient world" (36-37).

### Redemption

- Wellum, Stephen. Systematic Theology Volume I. Brentwood, TN: B&H Academic Publishing, 2024.

"Redemption is the third plot movement that shapes the broad contours of the Bible's interpretive framework and worldview" (419).

"Redemption is only possible if God unilaterally acts in sovereign grace to keep his promises to provide salvation for us. Salvation does not emerge from human initiative. The Scripture teaches that God must initiate to save" (419).

"In the Bible plotline, tension arises between God and his promise to redeem our sin before him. God alone must redeem us, given who he is at the holy. How can he forgive our sins and simultaneously satisfy his holy demand? This tension is heightened when we remember the significance of Adam in God's plan for creation. God has chosen to exercise his kingdom rule on earth through his image-sons, but given our sin, all humans stand condemned before God. Yet, as God's promise reminds us, he will redeem us and bring about a new creation through his provision of a human" (419-20).

- DeYoung, Kevin. Daily Doctrine. Wheaton, IL: Crossway, 2025.

"Biblical redemption starts with the covenantal relations among the person of the Trinity" (133).

### New Creation

- Wellum, Stephen. Systematic Theology Volume I. Brentwood, TN: B&H Academic Publishing, 2024.

"New creation or consummation is the last plot movement that shapes the Bible's theological framework and worldview. In Scripture, the movement of history to the new creation is due to the outworking of God's eternal plan centered in Christ" (423).

## Applying the Bible's Theological Framework by Its Plot Movements

- Wellum, Stephen. Systematic Theology Volume I. Brentwood, TN: B&H Academic Publishing, 2024.

"No creature can share the attributes of God (Col 2:9), carry out the works of God (Col 1:15-20; Heb 1:1-3), receive the worship of God (John 5:22-23, Phil 2:9-11; Heb 1:6; Rev 5:11-12), and bear the titles and name of God (John 1:1, 18; 8:58; Rom 9:5; Phil 2:9-11; Heb 1:8-9) unless he is God equal with God, and the one who shares the one, identical divine nature" (426-27).

- Gentry, Peter J, and Stephen J. Wellum. God's Kingdom through God's Covenant: A Concise Biblical Theology. Wheaton, IL: Crossway, 2015.

Typology studies the Old Testament salvation-historical relationships or "types" God has designed to correspond to and predictively prefigure their intensified antitypical fulfillment aspects in New Testament salvation history. Typology is symbolism rooted in historical and textual relationships. It is prophetic, predictive, and thus divinely given and intended" (39).

- Renihan, Samuel. The Mystery of Christ: His Covenant and His Kingdom. Cape Coral, FL: Founders Press, 2020.

"All of Scripture, and thus all redemptive history, is driving towards the arrival of the promised Seed of the woman" (31).

Typology functions on two levels. On an earthly level, animal sacrifices had an objective function, purpose, and meaning. And that meaning was substantially distinct from its antitypical meaning. The blood of goats and bulls is not the blood of Christ, and their forgiveness was not the forgiveness that Christ's blood affords. Nevertheless, they made Christ's forgiveness known" (33).

- Poythress, Vern. Biblical Typology: How the Old Testament Points to Christ, His Church, and the Consummation. Wheaton, IL: Crossway, 2024.

"Since Typology studies connections between earlier and later events in history, we have to understand something about the nature of history. So the first principles of importance is that God rules history. He rules it from the very beginning and forever into the future. See Psalm 90:1-2. So there is unity to God's plan" (27-29).

- Hamilton, James M. What is Biblical Theology? A Guide to the Story, Symbolism, and Pattern, Wheaton, IL: Crossway Publishing, 2014.

"Biblical theology is used to reflect on the interpretive perspective of the biblical authors. It is the framework of assumption sand presuppositions, associations and identifications, truths, and symbols there are taken for granted as an author or speaker describes the world and the events that take place in it" (15).