#Exodus_6:6-8 - "I will be your God, and you will be my people."

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Gentry, Peter J, and Stephen J. Wellum. God's Kingdom through God's Covenant: A Concise Biblical Theology. Wheaton, IL: Crossway, 2015.</mark>

"Covenant is all about the relationship between the Creator and his creation" (12)

"The covenants form the backbone of the Bible's metanarrative, and thus it is essential to put them together correctly to discern accurately the whole counsel of God (...) apart from properly understanding the nature of the biblical covenants and how they relate to each other, we will not correctly discern the message of the Bible and hence God's self-disclosure which centers on and culminates in Christ" (17).

[[3.03 Progressive Covenantalism|Progressive Covenantalism]] emphasizes the unfolding of God's plan from the Old to the New and stresses that God's unified plan unfolds through covenants, ultimately culminating in Jesus and the new covenants. Our triune God has only a plan of redemption, yet what that plan is as we trace his salvation work through the biblical covenants" (19).

- Horton, Michael. *Rediscovering the Holy Spirit: God's Perfecting Presence in Creation, Redemption, and Everyday Life.* Grand Rapids, MI: Zondervan, 2017.

The appeal is the old-covenant history of royal investiture that begins in Eden, with the Spirit's breadth of life, followed by all of the priestly imagery of glorious vestments and the event of Christ breathing on his disciples (115).

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Renihan, Samuel. The Mystery of Christ: His Covenant and His Kingdom. Cape Coral, FL: Founders Press, 2020.</mark>

"A covenant is a guaranteed commitment. Because God is one of the contracting parties under consideration, and because covenants are not a natural feature of the Creator-creature relationship, all covenants are the result of God's free initiative to carry out His purpose and do good to humanity. Covenants are not take-it-or-leave-it options. God imposes His covenants on man and determines the commitments" (40-41).

"Covenant theology specifically addresses the historical development and outworking of God's redemptive plan while simultaneously systematizing elements into a soteriology, practical ecclesiology, sacramentalology, and more" (12)

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Wellum, Stephen. *The 5 Solas Series: Christ Alone: The Uniqueness of Jesus as Savior*, Grand Rapids, MI: Zondervan, 2017.</mark>

"This covenantal storyline reveals both the necessity and identity of Christ and his work as the one person who (1) fulfills God's own righteousness as a man, (2) reconciles God himself with humanity, and (3) establish God's own saving rule and reign in this world--all because, and only because, Christ alone is God the Son incarnate" (31).

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Wellum, Stephen. Systematic Theology Volume I. Brentwood, TN: B&H Academic Publishing, 2024.</mark>

"Covenant theology views the covenants as more than a theme or concept of Scripture. Covenants function as the Bible's architectonic structure that provides the context within which we recognize the unity of Scripture amid its remarkable variety and make theological conclusions" (500).

"Covenant theology has taught that all of God's relations to humans are understood in terms of three covenants: the pre-temporal covenant of redemption, between the triune persons; the covenants of works, made with Adam before the fall on behalf of the entire human race; and the covenants of grace, made with Christ as the second Adam, and in him with al the elect as his seed, which, in history, is administered through a series of covenants from Adam to Christ. The covenants exhibit overall continuity, as they all express the single covenant of grace. Although administrative differences exist between the covenants, each covenant is substantially or essentially the same" (500-01).

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Horton, Michael. God's Promises: Introducing Covenant Theology. Grand Rapids, MI: Baker Academic, 2006</mark>.

"God's very existence is covenantal: Father, Son, and Holy Spirit live in unceasing devotion to each other" (10).

"We were not just created and then given a covenant, we were created as covenant creatures--partners not in deity, to be sure, but in the drama about to unfold in history" (10).

"Reformed theology at least attempts to interpret the whole counsel of God given the principles that Scripture interprets Scripture" (12).

"Paul speaks forcefully in Galatians 4 of two covenants, two mountains, and two mothers. A covenant of law is established at Mount Sinai, engendering an earthly Jerusalem, which is identified with Hagar, the enslaved person; a covenant of promise is given to Abraham and his seed, engendering a heavenly Jerusalem, which is identified with Sarah, the free woman. The principles of law and the promise give rise to antithetical forms of religion" (35).

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">DeYoung, Kevin. Daily Doctrine. Wheaton, IL: Crossway, 2025.</mark>

"#Exodus_24 is a picture of covenant confirmation. After initiating the covenant (Exodus 19), establishing the covenant's constitutional obligation, #Exodus_20, and applying the constitution as case law, #Exodus_21, #Exodus_22 #Exodus_23, God confirms the covenant with Moses. #Exodus_24 begins with a call to worship as the Lord summons Moses and Aaron, Nadab, and Abihu, and the seventy elders of Israel to draw near. Then Moses included the people in what can be described as a service of worship, a ceremony of covenant confirmation" (137).

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Sproul, RC. Truths We Confess: A Systematic Exposition of the Westminster Confession of Faith. Orlando, FL: Reformation Trust, 2019.</mark>

"The covenant of grace does not annul the covenant of works. The covenant of grace is what God does to ensure that, under the covenant of works, we do not perish, but are redeemed by Jesus Christ's fulfillment of this covenant" (182).

## The Covenants of Redemption

J.V. Fesko defines the covenant of redemption as the pre-temporal, intra-trinitarian agreements among Father, Son, and Holy Spirit to plan and execute the redemption of the elect. The covenants entail the appointment of the Son as surety of the covenants of grace, who accomplishes the redemption of the elect through His incarnation, perfect obedience, suffering, resurrection, and ascension. The covenant of redemption is also the root of the Spirit's role to anoint and equip the Son for His mission as surety and apply His finished work to the elect" (Fesko, The Trinity and the Covenant of Redemption, 2016: 245-52).

The covenant of redemption is an archetype of the historical covenants and serves as the foundation for the outworking of God's plan in history and for our covenantal union with Christ as our mediator.

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Renihan, Samuel. The Mystery of Christ: His Covenant and His Kingdom. Cape Coral, FL: Founders Press, 2020.</mark>

"The parties of the covenant of redemption are the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit" (153).

"God the Father gave a mission to His Servant. The very name the Servant of Jehovah is an indicator of this fact. The Father laid the Son under certain obligations or commitments. He commanded Him to become incarnate, obey the law perfectly, and offer Himself up as a substitutionary sacrifice for a special people. The Covenant of Redemption was a covenant of works. He is appointed as the federal head in this covenant. Jesus Himself spoke of this in #John_10:17-18." (154).

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">DeYoung, Kevin. Daily Doctrine. Wheaton, IL: Crossway, 2025.</mark>

"The covenant of redemption (pactum salutis) refers to the eternal agreement between the Father and the Son to save a people chosen in Christ before the ages began" (138).

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Grudem, Wayne. Systematic Theology. Grand Rapids, MI: Zondervan Academic. 2020.</mark>

"On the part of the Father, this covenant of redemption included an agreement to give to the Son a people whom he would redeem for his possession, to send the Son to be their representative, to prepare a body for the Son to dwell in as a man, to accept him as representatives his people whom he had redeemed, and to give him all authority in heaven and on earth, including the authority to pour out the Holy Spirit in power to apply redemption to his people" (650-51).

## The Covenant of Works

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Wellum, Stephen. Systematic Theology Volume I. Brentwood, TN: B&H Academic Publishing, 2024.</mark>

"For the covenants of works were made with Adam as the representative head of the human race before the fall. To Adam and his posterity, eternal life was promised on the condition of perfect obedience to the law of God. But Adam's disobedience plunged him and all humanity into sin, death, and condemnation. But due to God's free choice, the covenant of grace was established with the elect, by which salvation was offered to sinners through Christ" (503-504).

Covenant of Works vs. Mosaic Covenant = Mosaic Covenant is a republication of the Covenant of Works, thus viewing the Sinai covenant as a mixture of the Covenant of Works and grace.

Law (conditional-bilateral) and gospel (unconditional-unilateral)

"The Mosaic covenant is a legal, conditional covenant of grace that shares in the substance of the covenant of works. But most reject the republication thesis within covenant theology since in the covenant of grace one cannot have a mixture of works and gospel" (506).

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Horton, Michael. God's Promises: Introducing Covenant Theology. Grand Rapids, MI: Baker Academic, 2006.</mark>

"The point of this covenant, made with Adam in his integrity, is crucial. Before the fall, humanity in Adam was neither sinful nor righteous. He was on trial: would he follow his covenant Lord's pattern of working and resting, subduing and reigning, or would he go his own way and seek his good apart from God's word" (84)

"Law and love go hand in hand in Scripture. To obey God is to love him, and if one wants to know how to love God, the Bible's answer is the law" (Horton, Introduction to Covenant Theology*, 2006: 84).

"The Abrahamic and Mosaic covenants are related as the ever-lasting Sabbath rest is related to the land's typological rest and every seventh day. The Sabbath institution is a concrete instance of the double aspect: the outward observance is not dispensed with, but the inward sense of the Sabbath gains much greater clarity as it centers around Christ and his work for us" (104).

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Renihan, Samuel. The Mystery of Christ: His Covenant and His Kingdom. Cape Coral, FL: Founders Press, 2020.</mark>

"In a covenant of works, you must earn the reward. You get out what you put in. You reap what you sow. Obey and be blessed; disobey and be cursed. The idea of merit or earning, though, is relative in the sense that God discloses the terms of what the obedience rendered will be and what the blessings rewarded will be. Apart from God making rewards available through covenantal obedience, the creature could never claim recompense from God because it can never place the Creator in its debt. Therefore, if God says, Do this and receive that, then such is the agreement" (47).

The covenantal commitment with divine sanctions outlines the conditions of man's covenant. God committed Adam to obligations beyond his created obligations and added sanctions to guarantee his participation.

- God placed Adam in the Garden of Eden.
- God appointed Adam federal head over his natural offspring.
- God obligated Adam to a law of obedience.
- God promised eternal life to Adam.
- God threatened Adam with sanctions.

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.</mark>

"Ada was placed in a defined kingdom, appointed as a federal head, given a law of obedience, promised a reward upon fulfillment, and threatened with a curse. He was in a covenant of works which governed entrance into a consummated cosmos" (Renihan, The Mystery of Christ*, 2020: 69).

" That life was rooted in a covenant, just as the Christian life today, and that covenant is variously known as the covenant of nature, the covenant of life, the Edenic covenant, and the covenant of works" (206).

"The development of the covenant of grace preceded that of the doctrine of the covenant of works and paved the way for it" (206).

"He undertook freely to carry out the will of God. He placed Himself under the law, that He might redeem them that were under the law, and were no more in a position to obtain life by their own fulfillment of the law. He came to do what Adam failed to do, and did it in virtue of a covenant agreement" (209).

"Paul draws a parallel between Adam and Christ in #Romans_5:12-21, in connection with the doctrine of justification, can only be explained on the assumption that Adam, like Christ, was the head of a covenant" (209).

"Adam was constituted the representative head of the human race, so that he could act for all his descendants. He was temporarily put on probation in order to determine whether he would willingly subject his will to the will of God. He was given the promise of eternal life in the way of obedience, and thus, by the gracious disposition of God, acquired certain conditional rights. This covenant enabled Adam to obtain eternal life for himself and for his descendants in the way of obedience" (211).

"The promise in the covenant of works was not unconditional. The condition was that of implicit and perfect obedience. The divine law can demand nothing less than that, and the positive command not to eat of the fruit of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil" (211-12).

"The covenant of grace and redemption are two modes or phases of the one evangelical covenant of mercy" (265).

"The name counsel of peace is derived from #Zechariah_6:13. The scriptural character of the name cannot be maintained, but this, of course, does not detract from the reality of the counsel of peace" (266).

"Scripture clearly points to the fact that the plan of redemption was included in the eternal decree or counsel of God, #Ephesians_1:4; #Ephesians_3:11; #2_Thessalonians_2:13; #2_Timothy_1:9; #James_2:5; #1_Peter_1:2)" (266).

"There are passages of Scripture which not only point to the fact that the plan of God for the salvation of sinners was eternal, #Ephesians_1:4; #Ephesians_3:9; 11)but also indicate that it was the nature of a covenant. Christ speaks of promises made to Him before his advent, and repeatedly refers to a commission which He had received from the Father, #John_5:30; 43; #John_6:38-40; #John_17:4-12; #Romans_5:12-21; #1_Corinthians_15:22" (266).

"In the covenant of redemption, Christ undertook to atone for the sins of His people by bearing the necessary punishment and to meet the demands of the law for them. And by taking the place of delinquent man, He became the last Adam, and is as such also the head of the covenant, the Representative of all those whom the Father has given Him" (267).

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">DeYoung, Kevin. Daily Doctrine. Wheaton, IL: Crossway, 2025.</mark>

"The covenant of works refers to the arrangement between God and Adam in the Garden of Eden, whereby Adam, as a federal head of the human race, was promised life upon obedience to the divine command and threatened with death upon disobedience" (DeYoung, Daily Doctrine, 2024: 139).

"The covenant with Adam has been called by various names: the covenant of nature, the Edenic covenant, the covenant of creation, and the covenant of life. The covenant of works, however, is preferable because it underscores that the blessings and curses were to be metered out according to the principles of works instead of grace" (140).

## The Covenant of Grace

The covenant of grace begins immediately after the fall with the promise of #Genesis_3:15. This promise is progressively revealed and administered through the covenants with Noah, Abraham, Israel, and David. It is finally realized in Christ and the new covenant.

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Renihan, Samuel. The Mystery of Christ: His Covenant and His Kingdom. Cape Coral, FL: Founders Press, 2020.</mark>

"In contradiction to a covenant based on law is a covenant based on promise. In a covenant of grace, enjoyment of the blessings depends purely on what God chooses to promise. Theologians have used the category of grace because the blessings of the covenant are granted freely, apart from the works of the covenant partner" (47-48).

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.</mark>

The writer of Hebrews argues that the New Covenant is a better covenant than the Old Covenant because it was legally established on superior promises. One reason for the New Covenant's superiority to the Old is that the death of Christ accomplished far more than the blood of the Old Covenant's sacrificial animal victims" (Renihan, The Mystery of Christ, 2020: 160).

"Naturally, when God establishes a covenant with man, this monopleuric character is very much in evidence, for God and man are not equal parties. God is the sovereign who imposes His ordinances upon his creatures" (262).

"The main promise of God, which includes all other promises, is contained in the oft-repeated words. I will be a God unto thee, and to thy seed after thee. The promises are found in several Old and New Testament passages which speak of the introduction of a new phase of the covenant life, or refer to a renewal of the covenant, #Jeremiah_31:33; #Jeremiah_32:38-40; #Ezekiel_34:23-25; 30, 31, #Ezekiel_36:25-28; #Ezekiel_37:26; 27; #2_Corinthians_6:16-18; #Hebrews_8:10" (277).

"The covenant may be called a gracious covenant (a) because in it God allows a surety to meet our obligations; (b) because He himself provides the surety in the person of His Son, who meets the demands of justice, and (c) because by His grace, revealed in the operation of the Holy Spirit" (278).

"The covenant is eternal, also implies that it is inviolable; and this is one of the reasons why it can be called a testament (Hebrews 9:17). God remains forever true to His covenant" (278).

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">DeYoung, Kevin. Daily Doctrine. Wheaton, IL: Crossway, 2025.</mark>

"Since the fall, man has been rendered incapable of living by the covenant of works. But God, being gracious, has established another covenant--a covenant of grace "wherein he freely offered unto sinners life and salvation by Jesus Christ" (Westminster Confession of Faith, 7.3).

"The covenant of grace, though differently administered throughout redemptive history, is but the same under various [[3.04 Dispensationalism|Dispensationalism]]" (142).

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Hoekema, Anthony. Created in God's Image. Cambridge, UK: Wm B. Eerdmans Publishing Company: 1986.</mark>

"The covenant of grace is conditional or unconditional. Because man is a creature, the covenant is unconditional in its origin; God graciously establishes his covenant with his people apart from any conditions they must fulfill" (9).

## The New Covenant

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">DeYoung, Kevin. Daily Doctrine. Wheaton, IL: Crossway, 2025.</mark>

"The new covenant refers to the constellation of promises that find their yes and amen in Christ. These promises are rooted in all covenants that came before but find their fulfillment in the work of Christ and in the age of the Spirit. The good news of the new covenant will be fully realized in the age to come" (149).

The distinction between these two kinds of covenants is laid out in the following:

Matter | Restipulation | Sanction | Form

Law --> Obedience --> Covenant Partner --> Covenant of Works

Promise --> Reception --> Covenant Imposer --> Covenant of Grace