A [[3.01 Hermeneutical Frameworks|hermeneutical framework]] that looks at[[3.02 Covenantalism| covenantalism]] and [[3.04 Dispensationalism|dispensationalism]] to bridge the gap between them.

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Gentry, Peter J, and Stephen J. Wellum. God's Kingdom through God's Covenant: A Concise Biblical Theology. Wheaton, IL: Crossway, 2015.</mark>

"Covenants constitute the framework of the larger story. They are the backbone of the biblical narrative" (51).

The Major Covenants:

1. The Covenant with Creation #Genesis_1 #Genesis_2 #Genesis_3
2. The Covenants with Noah #Genesis_6 #Geneis_7 #Genesis_8 #Genesis_9
3. The Covenant with Abraham #Genesis_12 #Genesis_15 #Genesis_17 #Genesis_22
4. The Covenant at Sinai #Exodus_19 #Exodus_20 #Exodus_21 #Exodus_22 #Exodus_23 #Exodus_24
5. The Covenant with David #2_Samuel_7 #Psalm_89
6. The New Covenant #Jeremiah_31 #Jeremiah_32 #Jeremiah_33 #Jeremiah_34 #Isaiah_54 #Ezekiel_33

"A covenant does not necessarily begin or initiate a relationship. It can formalize in binding and legal terms an agreement between parties, who have developed a relationship before the covenant is made" (58).

"A covenant gives binding and legal status to a relationship using a formal and solemn ceremony" (59).

"Covenants constitute the framework of the larger story. They are the backbone of the biblical narrative" (51).

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Wellum, Stephen. Systematic Theology Volume I. Brentwood, TN: B&H Academic Publishing, 2024.</mark>

"Scripture presents a plurality of covenants, #Galatians_4:24; #Ephesians_2:12; #Hebrews_8:7-13 that progressively reveal our triune God's one redemptive plan for his one people, which reaches its fulfillment, telos, and terminus in Christ and the new covenant" (431).

"In Scripture, covenants are more than a unifying theme; they are the backbone to the Bible's entire storyline" ( 431).

"Kingdom through the progression of the covenants captures the fundamental dynamic at work as God's redemptive plan unfolds, which starts with Adam and creation and culminates in Christ" (432).

Four points need to be made to capture how the kingdom idea is understood in the OT before we see how the concept is fulfilled in Christ.

- The Triune God is the Universal Lord
- The Fall and God's Saving Reign
- The Coming of God's Redemptive Kingdom
- The Promises Proclaimed by the Prophets

"Contrary to Covenantalism that thinks of God's one redemptive plan in the terms of the 'covenant of grace' or Dispensationalism that tends to partition history in terms of dispensations, it is better to think of God's one redemptive plan, grounded in the covenant of redemption, revealed thought a plurality of covenants, all of which reveal their fulfillment in Christ and the new covenant. Following the fall, and by God's promise (Genesis 3:15), God's one redemptive plan is revealed through the covenants as the new covenant is progressively unveiled. This allows us to think of the continuity of God's plan across time, now fulfilled in Christ" (436).

## The Covenant with Noah

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Gentry, Peter J, and Stephen J. Wellum. God's Kingdom through God's Covenant: A Concise Biblical Theology. Wheaton, IL: Crossway, 2015.</mark>

"In four instances, God speaks of confirming or establishing a covenant with Noah #Genesis_6:18; #Genesis_9:9; 11, 17" (59).

"When God says that he is affirming or upholding his covenant with Noah, he is saying that his commitment to his creation--the care of the Creator to preserve, provide for, and rule over all that he has made" (60).

The terms of the covenant:

Covenant with Noah

- Be fruitful and increase in number.
- Fear of you
- Animals were given as food.
- Do not eat meat with blood.
- your blood (his brother's life)
- In the image of God

Covenant with Creation #Genesis_1:28)

- be fruitful
- Rule over fish, birds, and animals
- Plants given for food
- In his image

#Genesis_9:11 specifies the obligation God places upon himself —his promise to Noah and to the entire human race through him —never again will all life be cut off by flood waters. God reiterates his promise in verse 15 with a variation. We learn of this divine decision in #Genesis_8:21. William J Dumbreel aptly comments: the reference to the heart of man in #Genesis_8:21, which remains unchanged by the experience of the flood, refers initially to the eight who have been saved and thus throws into clear relief the nature of Noah's righteousness as something extrinsic to him. Since we are virtually being told that a deluge would be an appropriate response by God to the sin of any age, humanity has been preserved by grace alone" (65).

"There is no evidence anywhere in the completed canon of Scripture as a whole that this covenant has been annulled or superseded" (67).

"The unmerited favor and kindness of God in preserving his world in the covenant with Noah create a firm stage of history where God can work out his plan for rescuing his fallen world. It also points to the coming deliverance in Jesus Christ" (68).

## The Covenant with Creation

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Gentry, Peter J, and Stephen J. Wellum. God's Kingdom through God's Covenant: A Concise Biblical Theology. Wheaton, IL: Crossway, 2015.</mark>

#Genesis_1:26 defines a divine-human relationship with two vertical and horizontal dimensions. It describes human ontology as a covenant relationship between God and man and between man and earth" (83).

"Man is the divine image. As servant king and son of God, mankind will mediate God's rule to the creation in the context of a covenant relationship with God on the one hand and earth on the other" (84).

"The garden envisioned in #Genesis_2:8-17 is an enclosed or protected space. In fact, gardener was a descriptive title or epithet for monarchs in Mesopotamia. Gardener was a royal vocation" (87).

"The knowledge of good and evil has to do with the exercise of absolute moral autonomy. That is to say, knowing good and evil means choosing or determining for oneself what is right and wrong independently of God. Adam's decision to be self-legislating made him like God in one sense. Still, unlike God, he would not be able to foresee the consequences of his choices long term or always be certain of the issues before him" (91).

## The Covenant with Abraham

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Gentry, Peter J, and Stephen J. Wellum. God's Kingdom through God's Covenant: A Concise Biblical Theology. Wheaton, IL: Crossway, 2015.</mark>

Here is a new start. "Abram and his family constitute another Adam. Notice the parallels in the biblical narrative: Adam and Eve had three sons. Similarly, the genealogy in #Genesis_5 concludes with a man who has three sons. The genealogy in Genesis 11 concludes similarly, with a man who had three sons. This parallel is a literary technique inviting the reader to compare Abram with Noah and Adam" (94).

Key Points in the Abraham Narrative

- The giving of the promise: the call of Abram #Genesis_12
- Making the covenant: the promise of descendants and land #Genesis_15
- Affirming the covenant: the sign of circumcision #Genesis_17
- Abraham's obedience and confirmation of the promises by oath #Genesis_22 
- 
Formula A + B = C

- A: I will be your God
- B: You will be my people
- C: I will be your God and you will be my people.

"The covenant with Abraham is the basis for all of God's dealings with the human race from this point on, and the basis for all of his later plans and purposes in history. Thus, the covenants are the backbone of the metanarrative plot structure of the Bible" (128).

## The Mosaic Covenant

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Gentry, Peter J, and Stephen J. Wellum. God's Kingdom through God's Covenant: A Concise Biblical Theology. Wheaton, IL: Crossway, 2015.</mark>

"Image refers to the king's majestic power and rule over his subjects, while likeness refers to the king's petitionary role and relation to the deity. Therefore, the biblical narrative focuses at the start on establishing God's rule through a covenant relationship. The first humans rebelled against the creator God. As a result, there is chaos, discovery, and death in the creation at every level. The destructive path chosen by the first human led to the downward spiral of corruption and violence until divine intervention was required" (134).

The literary structure of the covenant (Exodus 19-40):

- The background: Chp 19
- The Ten Words: Chap 20
- The Judgements: Chp 21-23
- The ceremony of covenant ratification: Chap 24
- Worship: Chp 24-40

"The book of Deuteronomy is the center of the Old Testament, in terms of metanarrative and theology. First, Deuteronomy brings the Pentateuch, or the Bible's first five books, to a climax and conclusion. According to the book of Genesis, God called Abraham to give him a land from which would emanate his blessing and salvation to the ends of the earth. In Deuteronomy, Abraham's family is now poised at the entrance to that land, and they are given instructions on how to live in it, so that they might be a blessing and bring salvation to the ends of the earth. The book of Exodus narrates how God redeemed Israel from Egypt so that they might come to a mountain, worship Him, and begin to live in conformity with His word as a holy nation and royal priesthood. Further instruction is given in Leviticus, and then the wandering through the wilderness is the subject of Numbers, bringing the people to the very point. Deuteronomy is the climax of the Pentateuch" (171).

Love the Lord your God

- The central command to love God is modified by three prepositional phrases: (1) with all your heart, (2) with all your soul, and (3) with all your strength. The heart is the core of who you are, the center of each person.

## The Covenant with David

The Davidic Covenant is the promise of a king from David's line whose throne will be established forever #2_Samuel_7). Therefore, in the biblical narrative, 2 Samuel 7 illustrates Christ as the eternal Davidic king, ruling over God's people in the inaugurated kingdom of the new covenant.

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Wellum, Stephen. Systematic Theology Volume I. Brentwood, TN: B&H Academic Publishing, 2024.</mark>

"The Davidic Covenant is the epitome of the OT covenants; it brings the previous covenants to a climax in the king, the representative of Israel, the seed of Abraham, and another Adam. Two key points are crucial in understanding the magnitude of the Davidic covenant within God's unfolding plan. First, we must note that the location of the Davidic covenants in the Bible's story grasps its organic relationship to what preceded it and what follows. Second, we must consider the unilateral-bilateral tension within he covenant to see how these tensions, as with earlier covenants, contribute to the Bible's overall metanarrative and theological framework" (462).

"If we link the covenants together, God's redemptive plan is to restore humanity's vice-regent role in creation through the seed of the woman. By the time we get to David, we know who will restore the lost fortunes of creation" (463).

## The New Covenant

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Gentry, Peter J, and Stephen J. Wellum. God's Kingdom through God's Covenant: A Concise Biblical Theology. Wheaton, IL: Crossway, 2015.</mark>

"The metanarrative of Scripture begins with a creator God who made our world, our universe. As Creator, he is committed to caring for and sustaining all of his creation. He governs and rules wisely over all his creatures and works. The apex and crown of his creative work is humankind. He has entrusted the human race with the administration and stewardship of His word. This covenantal arrangement was violated by human disloyalty and rebellion. The first man decided to act independently of the Creator. Everything is now riddled with chaos and evil" (207).

"The prophets spoke of the new covenant in different places at different times in various ways. Five times they refer to the everlasting covenant, three times to a covenant of peace, three times to a promise that God will give His people a new heart and a new spirit, and only once to the phrase 'new covenant.' But they all refer to the same things" (208).

- Everlasting covenant: #Jeremiah_32:36-41; #Jeremiah_50:2-5; #Ezekiel_37:15-28; #Isaiah_55:1-5; #Isaiah_61:8-9
- Covenant of peace: #Isaiah_54:1-10; #Ezekiel_34:20-31; #Ezekiel_37:15-28
- Promise of a new heart, a new spirit: #Ezekiel_11:18-21; #Ezekiel_18:30-32; #Ezekiel_36:24-32
- New Covenant: #Jeremiah_31:31-34

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Wellum, Stephen. Systematic Theology Volume I. Brentwood, TN: B&H Academic Publishing, 2024.</mark>

"The new covenant changes the structure of God's people. Under the old covenant, God dealt with people through a mediated or tribal-representative structure, in which he related to his people through specially called mediators. The new covenant changes the nature of God's people. We can consider this in two ways: first, the prophets anticipated that the new covenant people would consist of believing individuals from every nation, not merely the nation of Israel. The new covenant changes the sacrificial system for God's people. The old covenant offered the forgiveness of sins through the priestly sacrificial system. The OT believer knew that this was not enough, as evidenced by he repetitive nature of the system and the sacrifice offered" (466-468).

In the NT, the church is central to God's redemptive plan and our Lord's work. Jesus reminds us how central she is to the messianic mission when he says, "I will build my church" #Matthew_16:18). By this time in his ministry, Jesus, as the faithful Israel, has begun to gather his messianic community by calling the twelve disciples and constituting them as the new Israel" (478-79).

## Critique of [Covenantalism](onenote:#3.02%20Covenantalism&section-id={CD8D5A60-908F-4844-8F8C-9B74EB1AB3FF}&page-id={0A2BF002-46AA-CB42-AFBD-5B602C6D6A1C}&end&base-path=https://d.docs.live.net/FC52DEA27C35B98D/Documents/Reformed%20Dogmatics/Prolegomena/3%20Hermeneutcal%20Framework.one) and [Dispensationalism](onenote:#3.04%20Dispensationalism&section-id={CD8D5A60-908F-4844-8F8C-9B74EB1AB3FF}&page-id={3CF5E3A2-7D1E-1C4B-A54E-4E10FD6815E4}&end&base-path=https://d.docs.live.net/FC52DEA27C35B98D/Documents/Reformed%20Dogmatics/Prolegomena/3%20Hermeneutcal%20Framework.one)

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Wellum, Stephen. Systematic Theology Volume I. Brentwood, TN: B&H Academic Publishing, 2024.</mark>

"Since the covenant of grace is theological language, we must ensure that it best explains the biblical teaching. But I sympathize with how 1689 Federalists employ the concept of the covenant of grace and equate it with the new covenant, even though I am hesitant to use that language. However, we state that it must preserve what Scripture teaches, namely that our triune God has eternally planned our redemption in Christ, which is progressively revealed through the covenants until it reaches its fulfillment in Christ. We must also preserve that after God's promise of redemption each covenant, as part of the one plan of God, reveals, predicts, and anticipates in a whole host of ways who the seed of the women will be, how God will redeem his people, and what the ultimate grounds for our justification is in Christ, even though OT saints were forgiven their sins by grace through faith and in Christ as they believed the covenant promises of God centered in Christ" (521-22).

"1689 Federalists accept the tripartite division of the covenant and argue that the Decalogue is God's eternal moral law for all people as it is given in the covenant. Although we are not under the Mosaic covenant, all people are directly under the Decalogue, as it is given to Israel. In one sense, everyone agrees that the Decalogue reflects God's moral demand and thus his moral law. However, the problem arises regarding the Sabbath command. If the Decalogue comes over to us as it is given in the covenant, then it follows that all people must obey the Sabbath command. However, the problem is how we justify such a position in light of the entire canon of Scripture. In the New Testament, there is little evidence of the Sabbath command continuing for the church or society, or of its transfer to the Lord's Day. Instead, the Sabbath is best viewed as a command and type/pattern that looks back to the creation rest and forward to a greater salvation rest in Christ, which he has now accomplished and which we now enjoy" (523).