- Wellum, Stephen. Systematic Theology Volume I. Brentwood, TN: B&H Academic Publishing, 2024.

"Dispensationalism is not a monolithic viewpoint. Over the years, it has undergone several revisions, although it remains united by a common core. The term dispensation is a biblical term derived from oikonomeo, which means to manage, regulate, administer, and plan the affairs of a household. Behind the word is God's plan or administration being accomplished in this world and how God arranges and orders his relationship to us" (487).

"Dispensationalism does not view the progression of the covenants as the backbone of the Bible's story. Instead, the covenants are a major biblical theme. Still, structurally, they are not the central way God's plan unfolds across time, contrary to our discussion for the Biblical storyline in [[3.03 Progressive Covenantalism|Progressive Covenantalism]]" (488).

"For dispensationalists, the salvation of Gentiles is not part of the fulfillment of the promises made to Israel as a nation now realized in the church. God has promised national Israel, first in the Abrahamic covenant and reaffirmed by the prophets, the possession of the land under Christ's rule as the Davidic king, which still awaits its fulfillment in the millennium and consummation. Since the OT promises a national Israel have not yet been realized, in the future, Israel, as a nation, will be restored and only then will she exercise her mediator role to the nations in the land. However, some progressives downplay Israel's future mediator role" (489).

- Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.

"A dispensation is a period of time during which man is tested in respect of obedience to some specific revelation of the will of God" (291).

"Each of the dispensations may be regarded as a new test of the natural man, and each ends in judgment--marking his failures" (291).

"The whole Old Testament points forward to the coming Messiah. This forward look characterizes the promise, the promise to the patriarchs, the whole Mosaic ritual, and the central messages of the prophets" (294).

- Bray, Gerald. The Doctrine of God: Contours of Christian Theology. Downers Grove, IL: InterVarsity Press, 1993.

"We can begin to understand it only in terms of God's economy or dispensation, a theological term which is used to describe the way God has chosen to govern his creation" (93).

- Allison, Gregg. Sojourners and Strangers: The Doctrine of the Church. Wheaton, IL: Crossway: 2012.

"The Adamic covenant or covenant of nature (1) is unilateral, being established by God the Creator of the creation in general #Genesis_1:1-25)" (65).

"The covenant will only be fulfilled not by a faithful father alone, but also by a faithful son. As #Psalm_89:28-35 indicates, God himself swears an oath to uphold the Davidic covenant based on his own faithfulness and holiness" (68-69).

"The Adamic covenant or covenant with the creation establishes the structured relationship between God and his human creatures in the created order. The Noahic covenant, in one sense, is a new covenant; yet, it has such striking reminiscences of the Adamic covenant that it may also be seen as a renewal of that original covenant with the creation. As for the race of human beings that emerges after the catastrophic flood, nothing has changed. The divine assessment of the situation after the flood, as before the deluge, was that the intention of man's heart is evil from his youth #Genesis_8:21. The Abrahamic covenant follows, in which He will take one man, Abraham. He will multiply a particular people through him to bring blessing to all the families of the earth #Genesis_12:3. The Mosaic covenant was intended to instruct the particular descendants of Abraham about how to live in a covenant relationship with God. The Davidic covenant extends the Abrahamic covenant, specifying that the blessing of God will come through the line of David" (69-70).

## Classic Dispensationalism

- Wellum, Stephen. Systematic Theology Volume I. Brentwood, TN: B&H Academic Publishing, 2024.

"Central to classic dispensationalism is a dualistic conception of redemption linked to God's pursuit of two different purposes, one related to heaven and the other to earth, and tied to two different groups of people, a heavenly and earthly humanity" (491).

Divide redemptive history into seven different dispensations:

- Innocence (Eden)
- Conscience (Fall to Flood)
- Human Government (Noah to Babel)
- Promise (Abraham to Egypt)
- Law (Moses to John the Baptist)
- Grace (Church Age)
- Kingdom (millennium)

## Traditional Dispensationalism

- Wellum, Stephen. Systematic Theology Volume I. Brentwood, TN: B&H Academic Publishing, 2024.

"In the 1950s, dispensationalism rejected the earlier eternal distinctions between God's earthly and heavenly peoples. In its place, it argued for two people of God: Israel as an ethnic, national people, and the church as a distinct international community'' (Wellum, Systematic Theology, 2024: 493).

"...view also simplified the number of dispensations to three: God's purposes in the dispensations before grace (before the church), the dispensation of grace (the church age), and the kingdom viewed as the millennial reign of Christ on earth. The traditional view also revised its understanding of the relationship between the new covenant and the church. Given that the NT applies Jeremiah 31 to the church, it argued that the church was the spiritual seed of Abraham and that the Abrahamic covenant was fulfilled spiritually in the church" (493-94).

## Progressive Dispensationalism

- Wellum, Stephen. Systematic Theology Volume I. Brentwood, TN: B&H Academic Publishing, 2024.

Unlike [[3.02 Covenantalism|Covenantalism]] progressive dispensationalism insists on a qualitative progression in the manifestation of grace that features a fundamental discontinuity in God's plan. For this reason, dispensations are not simply different historical expressions of the same redemption experience, but they lead to and culminate in one redemptive plan" (496).