##  The Relationship between Anthropology and Christology

- Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.

"There is a very close connection between the doctrine of man and the doctrine of Christ. The former deals with man, created in the Imago Dei (the image of God) and endowed with true knowledge, righteousness, and holiness, but through the willful transgression of God's law, despoiled of his true humanity and transformed into a sinner. It portrays a man as a highly privileged creature of God, still bearing some of the traces of his original glory; yet, as a creature, he has lost his birthright, his true freedom, and his original righteousness and holiness. This means that it directs attention, not merely, or even primarily, to the creatureliness, but to the man, the distance resulting from the fall of man, which neither man nor angels can bridge; and is such virtually a cry for divine help" (307).

"Christology is in part the answer to that cry. It accounts for God's objective work in Christ to bridge the chasm and remove the distances. It shows us God coming to man, to remove the barriers between God and many be meeting the conditions of the law in Christ, and to restore man to His blessed communion" (307).

"Christ stands out as both human and divine, the Son of Man, but also the Son of God. His sinless character is maintained, and He is regarded as a proper object of worship. Naturally, the problem presented by Christ, as at once God and man, and the difficulties involved in such a conception, were not fully felt by the early Christian mind and only dawned on it in the light of controversy" (307-08).

"Gnostics were profoundly influenced by the dualistic concept of the Greeks, in which matter, as inherently evil, is represented as utterly opposed to spirit; and by a mystic tendency to regard earthly things as allegorical representations of great cosmic redeeming processes. They rejected the idea of an incarnation, a manifestation of God in a visible form" (308).

Modalism also denied the humanity of Christ, partly in the interest of His deity, and partly to preserve the unity of "God's being. They saw in Him merely a mode or manifestation of the one God, in whom they recognized no distinction of persons" (308).

Tertullian and Origen taught a species of subordination, and this became a stepping stone for Arianism, in which Christ is distinguished from the Logos as the divine reason and is represented as a pre-temporal, superhuman creature, the first of the creatures, not God, yet more than man. Athanasius of Alexandria took issue with Arius and vigorously defended the position that the Son is consubstantial with, and of the same essence as, the Father, a position that the Council of Nice officially adopted.

Another position is that of Christ, as it relates to his divine nature, specifically the Logos as the only-begotten Son of God in a natural sense. However, it is considered Christ on His human side as a Son of God merely by adoption, a doctrine known as Adoptionism.

"Reformed theologians saw in the Martin Luther Doctrine that after the incarnation, the properties of both natures can be attributed to the one person of Christ. The person of Christ can be said to be # omniscient, but also, to have but limited knowledge, can be regarded as Omnipresent but also as being limited at any particular time to a single place" (311).

"Friedrich Schleiermacher stood at the head of the new development. He regarded Christ as a new creation, in which human nature is elevated to the plane of ideal perfection. Yet his Christ can hardly be said to rise above the human level" (312).

"Except Friedrich Schleiermacher, no one has exercised greater influence on present-day theology than Alan Ritschl. His Christology takes its starting point in the work, rather than in the person of Christ. The work of Christ determines the dignity of His person. He was a mere man, but given the work which He accomplished, the service He rendered, we rightly attribute to Him the predicate of Godhead" (313).

"Modern teachings about Christ are all based on the doctrine of the continuity of God and man" (313).

- Grudem, Wayne. Systematic Theology. Grand Rapids, MI: Zondervan Academic. 2020.

"Jesus had to be fully man if he was going to be the Messiah and earn our salvation. We can list seven of those reasons here:

 1. For representative obedience.
 2. To be a substitute sacrifice
 3. To be the One Mediator between God and Human Beings
 4. To fulfill God's Original Purpose for man to rule over creation
 5. To be our example and pattern in life
 6. To be the pattern for our redeemed bodies
 7. To sympathize as High Priest" (675-77).

- Macleod, Donald. The Person of Christ: Contours of Christian Theology. Downers Grove, IL: InterVarsity Press, 1998.

"The New Testament, almost unanimously, presents us with a Christology from above. It starts from the side of his deity, not from that of his humanity. There is probably good reason for this. The New Testament is looking at Christ in the light of the resurrection; and if we are articulating our theology from the standpoint of faith" (22).

"John's Christology is only through his Prologue with its sustained emphasis on the deity of Christ" (22).