## The Doctrine of Man in Dogmatics

- Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.

"Man is not only the crown of creation, but also the object of God's special care. And God's revelation in Scripture is a revelation that is not only given to man, but also a revelation in which man is vitally concerned" (175).

"Theological Anthropology is concerned only with what the Bible says respecting man and the relation in which he stands and should stand to God" (175)."

- Hoekema, Anthony. Created in God's Image. Cambridge, UK: Wm B. Eerdmans Publishing Company: 1986.

"The renewal of man is the renewal of the image which is the goal of regeneration" (47).

## The Scriptural Account of the Origin of Man

- Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.

Scripture offers us a twofold account of the creation of man, one in #Genesis_1:27 and the other in #Genesis_2:7-23. Higher criticism thinks that the writers of Genesis pieced together two creation narratives, the first found in #Genesis_1:1-2:3, and the second in #Genesis_2:4-25; and that these two independent and contradictory" (176).

"Before the creation of man, he leads us back, as it were, into the council of God, acquainting us with the divine decree in the worlds, "Let us make man in our image, after our likeness" (Genesis 1:26)" (176). For more information on the decrees, see [[7.01 The Divine Decree of God in General|the Divine Decrees of God]].

"And God created man. In the work of creation are contained the former expressions, which are entirely wanting in the latter. The work of God in the creation of man was not mediated in any sense of the word. He did make use of pre-existing material in forming the body of man, but even this was excluded in the creation of the soul" (177).

Concerning fish, birds, and beasts, we read that God created them after their kind, that is, in their typical form. Man, however, was not so made and much less than an inferior. The original condition of man, and merely call attention to it here, to bring out the fact that in the narrative of creation the creation of man stands out as something distinctive" (177).

"Jehovah breathed into his (man's) nostrils the breath of life, and man became a living being. Twofold the Nature of Man is asserted, and their teaching is corroborated by other passages of Scripture, such as #Ecclesiastes_12:7; #Matthew_10:28; #Luke_8:55; #2_Corinthians_5:1-8; #Philippians_1:22-24; #Hebrews_12:9" (177).

"Man is represented as standing at the apex of all the created orders. He is crowned as king of the lower creation, and is given dominion over all the inferior creatures" (177).

- Hays, Gary Edward and Mark L. Strauss, Ed. The Pentateuch: Life in the Presence of God. Brentwood, TN: B&H Academic: 2004.

"Note, too, that these first people whom God creates are ethnically unidentified. He does not, for example, create "Hebrews" or "Israelites." This has strong theological implications about the value of human life. All people are created in the image of God and are thus special" (27).

## The Evolutionary Theory of Man's Origin

### The Unity of Humanity

- Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.

"Scripture teaches that the whole human race descended from a single pair. God created Adam and Eve as the beginning of the human species, and commanded them to be fruitful and multiply, replenish the earth" (182).

"The same truth is basic to the organic unity of the human race in the first transgression, and of the provision for the salvation of the race in Christ #Romans_5:12; #1_Corinthians_15:21, 22" (182).

- Saint Augustine. *City of God*. Translated by Henry Bettenson. London, England: Penguin Books, 2003. 

He created man's nature as a kind of mean between angels and beasts, so that if he submitted to his Creator, as to his true sovereign Lord, and observed his instructions with dutiful obedience, he should pass over into the fellowship of the angels, ataining an immortality of endless felicity, without an intervening death; but if he used his free will in arrogance and disobedience, and thus offended God his Lord, he should live like the beats, under sentence of death, should be the slave of his desires, and destined after death for eternal punishment (502).