- Saint Augustine. *City of God*. Translated by Henry Bettenson. London, England: Penguin Books, 2003. 

Virtues and vices are not the same thing, even if they undergo the same torment (14).Devotion combined with self-sufficiency yields great profit. For we brought nothing into this world, and now we cannot take anything away with us. So, if we have food and clothes, we are content. For those who wish to fall into temptation and into a snare, and into many foolish and harmful desires, which plunge me into death and destruction. For acquisitiveness is the root of all evils, those who have this as their aim have strayed away from the path and have entangled themselves in many sorrows. (17).

There will be no pollution, if the lust is another's if there is pollution, the lust is not another's. Now purity is a virtue of the mind (27)
## The Elements of Human Nature | Dichotomy vs. Trichotomy

- Bavinck, Herman. Reformed Dogmatics: Abridged in One Volume. Grand Rapids, MI: Baker Academic, 2011.

"To be human is to be an image bearer of God, created in his likeness and originally righteous and holy" (317).

Those who adopt the trichotomy position have the following pieces of Scripture for support; however, these are also used by the dichotomy:

- #1_Thessalonians_5:23

- #Hebrews_4:12

- #1_Corinthians_2:14-3:4

- #1_Corinthians_14:14

Man is said to be either "body and soul" or "body and spirit"

- Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.

"It is customary, especially in Christian circles, to conceive of man as consisting of two, and only two distinct parts, namely body and soul (dichotomy). Human nature can also be viewed as consisting of three parts: body, soul, and spirit. The soul was regarded as immaterial and adapted to the body" (185).

"The prevailing representation of the nature of man in Scripture is dichotomy. The Bible teaches us to view the nature of man as a unity, and not as a duality, consisting of two different elements, each of which moves along parallel lines but does not unite to form a single organism" (186).

"Every act of man is seen as an act of the whole man" (186).

The difference between dichotomy and trichotomy lies in the distinct ways Scripture is interpreted, particularly regarding the body, soul, and spirit. Trichotomy refers to how Scripture employs terms such as "body and soul" or "body and spirit." However, these might be just hermeneutical misunderstandings of Scripture.

See 1 Thessalonians 5:23

"The mere mention of spirit and soul alongside each other does not provide that, according to Scripture, they are two distinct substances, any more than #Matthew_22:37 provides that Jesus regarded heart and soul and mind as three distinct substances" (188-89).

- DeMarest, Bruce. *The Cross and Salvation: The Doctrine of Salvation*. Crossway, Wheaton, IL: 1997.

"Scripture teaches that Adam's sin affected not only himself but all of his offspring" (73).

"The human race before the fall was posse non peccare et mori (able not to sin and die), but after the fall, each sinful member is non posse non peccare et mori (not able not to sin and die). The entire human race is afflicted with objective guilt, alienation from God, and depraved natures that refuse to know love and serve the Creator" (74).


- DeYoung, Kevin. Daily Doctrine. Wheaton, IL: Crossway, 2025.

"The position that affirms that man consists of body and soul is called dichotomy. There is an alternative position, however, called trichotomy, which affirms that man is comprised of three things: body, soul, and spirit. Two texts, in particular, seem to support trichotomy: #1_Thessalonians_5:23 and #Hebrews_4:12. While trichotomy is not an unorthodox view, dichotomy has been the majority throughout church history" (104-05).

- Hoekema, Anthony. Created in God's Image. Cambridge, UK: Wm B. Eerdmans Publishing Company: 1986.

According to Irenaeus, "believers have three components in their being: the body, the soul, and the spirit. Unbelievers, however, have only souls and bodies" (35).

## The Origin of the Soul in the Individual

- DeYoung, Kevin. Daily Doctrine. Wheaton, IL: Crossway, 2025.

"The body-soul distinction can seem unimportant or even like an imposition of Greek philosophy. But Scripture often emphasizes that we would be foolish to live for the body to the neglect of our souls or spirits #Matthew_10:28; #1_Corinthians_5:5)" (105).

There are three different explanations for the origin of the soul:

1. Preexistent--each of us has an earlier immaterial existence. Origen went so far as to argue that our current embodied life reflects the good or bad of our previous immaterial life.

2. Traducianism (shoot or sprout from a vine) - this view teaches that souls of men are propagated in the same way that bodies are propagated. God is depicted as breathing life into Adam, but the same process is not indicated for Eve. God created a soul for the first man, but after that, each soul would be formed by a natural process.

3. Creationism is the view that the immediate creation of God creates each soul. God is credited with being the Father of spirits (Hebrews 12:9) and is said to have formed the spirit of man within him (Zechariah 12:1). Creationism best explains how Christ can possess a true human nature without inheriting the guilt and pollution from Adam's sin.