## Historical View of the Image of God in Man

- Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.

"According to Scripture, man was created in the image of God, and is therefore God-related. Traces of this truth are found even in Gentile literature" (196).

"The early Church Fathers were quite agreed that the image of God in man consisted primarily in man's rational and moral characteristics, and his capacity for holiness; but some were inclined to include also bodily traits" (196).

"The image consisted merely in this, that man with reason, so that he could know God: with free will, so that he was able to choose and do the good; and by this with the necessary power to rule the lower creation" (196).

"Reformers rejected the distinction between the image and the likeness, and considered original righteousness as included in the image of God, and as belonging to the very nature of man in its original condition" (196).

"By this term (image of God) is denoted the integrity with which Adam was endued when his intellect was clear, his affections subordinated to reason, all his senses duly regulated, and when he truly ascribed all his excellence to the admirable gifts of his Maker" (197).

The Socinians and some of the early Arminians taught that the image of God consisted only in man's dominion over the lower creation. Friedrich Schleiermacher rejected the idea of an original state of integrity and original righteousness as a necessary doctrine" (197).

"The image of God in many can only be a certain receptivity for the divine" (197).

- Grudem, Wayne. Systematic Theology. Grand Rapids, MI: Zondervan Academic. 2020.

"We may use the following definition: the fact that man is in the image of God means that man is like God and represents God" (567).

- Hoekema, Anthony. Created in God's Image. Cambridge, UK: Wm B. Eerdmans Publishing Company: 1986.

"The Bible teaches, the most important thing about man is that he is inescapably related to God; we must judge as deficient any anthropology which denies that relatedness" (4).

"One of the fundamental presuppositions of the Christian view of man is belief in God as the Creator, which leads to the view that the human person does not exist autonomously or independently, but as a creature of God. The Scriptures make it very clear that all created things and all creatures begin are totally dependent on God. God preserves all his creatures, including human beings, implying that they depend on him for their conditional existence. We cannot lift a finger apart from God's will (5).

## Scriptural Data

- Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.

"The words image and likeness are used synonymously and interchangeably, and therefore do not refer to two different things" (197).

The idea is that by creation, that which was archetypal knowledge in God became ectypal knowledge in man. Man not only bears the image of God, but is His very image" (197-98).

"The image of God in which man was created certainly includes what is generally called original righteousness, or more specifically, true knowledge, righteousness, and holiness. The nature of man's original condition, where it speaks of man as being renewed in Christ, that is, as being brought back to a former condition" (198).

"But the image of God is not to be restricted to the original knowledge, righteousness, and holiness which were lost by sin, but also includes elements which belong to the natural constitution of man. As created in the image of God, man has a rational and moral nature, which he did not lose by sin and which he could not lose without ceasing to be man" (198).

"The crime of murder owes its enormity to the fact that it is an attack on the image of God. Given these passages of Scripture, it is unwarranted to say that man has completely lost the image of God" (198).

"God is spirit, and it is but natural to expect that this element of spirituality also finds expression in man as the image of God" (198).

- DeYoung, Kevin. Daily Doctrine. Wheaton, IL: Crossway, 2025.

"When God created the first human pair in his image, he created them male and female #Genesis_1:27. He made the woman to be a complement and help to the man #Genesis_2:1-22. Far from being a mere cultural construct, God depicts the existence of man and a woman as essential to his creational plan" (111).

- Hoekema, Anthony. Created in God's Image. Cambridge, UK: Wm B. Eerdmans Publishing Company: 1986.

"Since we are creatures, God must preserve us and keep us true to him. The Bible clearly teaches that #John_10:27-28; #Romans_8:38-39; #Hebrews_7:25; #1_Peter_1:3-5; #Jude_24. But we must not lose sight of the other side of the paradox: believers must persevere in the faith #Matthew_10:22; #1_Corinthians_16:13; #Hebrews_3:14; #Revelation_3:11)" (9).

"Since God is spirit #John_4:24, we may not conclude that the resemblance to God in this instance is found in the physical difference between men and women. The resemblance must be found in the fact that man needs the companionship of women, that the human person is a social being, that woman complements man and that man complements woman" (14).

## Man as the Image of God

### The Original Condition of Man


- Bavinck, Herman. Reformed Dogmatics: Abridged in One Volume. Grand Rapids, MI: Baker Academic, 2011.

"Image tells us that God is the archetype, humanity the ectype; likeness adds the notion that the image corresponds in all parts to the original" (318).

"Christ, not Adam, is the first full, true spiritual man" (328-29).

"Humanity, where the spiritual and material world are joined together, is the crowning culmination of creation" (311).

"This theory has been seriously opposed, not only by Bible-believers but also by natural scientists and philosophers more broadly" (312).

- Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.

"Scripture asserts that man was created in the image and after the likeness of God #Genesis_1:26, 27; #Genesis_9:6; #James_3:9 and speaks of man as being and as bearing the image of God #1_Corinthians_11:7; #1_Corinthians_15:49)" (200).

"The doctrine of the image of God in man is of the greatest importance in theology, for that image is the expression of that which is most distinctive in man and his relation to God. The fact that man is the image of God distinguishes him from the animal and every other creature" (200).

- DeYoung, Kevin. Daily Doctrine. Wheaton, IL: Crossway, 2025.

"While we can understand something about human nature ontologically apart from Christ, only by the incarnation can we know what obedient human life looks like. The gospel is the message about the glory of Christ, who is the image of God #2_Corinthians_4:4). By his Spirit, we can be transformed into the same image from one degree of glory to another (3:17-18). To be made in the image of God means we ought to be remade in the likeness of Christ" (114).

"IF the binary of male and female is God's idea, and if we are meant to embrace, by divine design, our biological and creational differences as men and women, then it stands to reason that the confusion of these realities would be displeasing to God" (112).

- Grudem, Wayne. Systematic Theology. Grand Rapids, MI: Zondervan Academic. 2020.

"We are creatures who are morally accountable before God for our actions, and this is based on he fact that God requires us to imitate his own moral purity. Corresponding to the accountability, we have (2) an inner sense of right and wrong that sets us apart from animals. When we act according to God's moral standards, our likeness to God is reflected in behavior that is holy and righteous before him" (571).


- Hoekema, Anthony. Created in God's Image. Cambridge, UK: Wm B. Eerdmans Publishing Company: 1986.

"To be creatures means that God is the potter and we are the clay #Romans_9:21; to be the persons means that we are the ones who fashion our lives by our own decisions (Galatians 6:7-8).  The Bible teaches both man's creatureliness and man's personhood" (6).

The fact that man is a creature implies that after he has fallen into sin, he can be redeemed from sin and rescued from his fallen state only through God's sovereign intervention on his behalf. They must choose freely, in the strength of the Holy Spirit, to repent of sin and to believe in the Lord Jesus Christ" (7).

"The concept of man as the image or likeness of God tells us that man, as he was created, was to mirror God and to represent God. God does not want his creatures to make images of him, since he has already created an image of himself: a living, walking, talking image" (67).

- Sproul, RC. Truths We Confess: A Systematic Exposition of the Westminster Confession of Faith. Orlando, FL: Reformation Trust, 2019.

"God endowed (or stamped) only one with His own image [...] Rome takes the position that the words refer to distinct aspects of our humanity images to our rational capacity as reasonable creatures, and likeness to a particular virtue that is a special, added gift of original holiness. God implanted this additional gift of righteousness, called the donum superadditum or superadded gift, in Adam and Eve, so it was not something they achieved" (117).

"God created Adam and Eve with all the necessary equipment and ability to reflect the righteousness and true holiness of God to the rest of the created realm" (119).
