- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Owen, John. *Communion with God*. Banner of Truth Trust, Carlisle, PA: 2024.</mark>

Communion "is generally attached to it in religious phraseology. It denotes not merely the interchange of feeling between God in his gracious character and a soul in a state of grace, but the gracious relationship upon which this holy interchange is based." 

[[10.01 The Person of Christ]] then, is the foundation of all our communion with God and by the Spirit believers now receive boldness of faith" (2).

"The knowledge that God and man can live in fellowship together is hidden in Christ" (3).

"This spiritual and holy communion of the saints with each person of the Godhead is very clear in Scripture" (6) -- see [[6.01 The Doctrine of the Trinity in History]] for the importance of understanding the Doctrine of the Trinity and how [[6.02 God as Trinity in Unity]] is important in understanding communion with Christ. 

"The Father communicates all grace to us by his own authoritative will, #John_5:21; #James_1:18). Life-giving power is vested in the Father. The Son communicates to

"If we wish to have fellowship with the Son of God, then it is part of our wisdom to know ourselves. To know ourselves in respect of sin, righteousness, and judgement is true and sound wisdom" (103).

## Communion with God the Father

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Owen, John. Communion with God. Banner of Truth Trust, Carlisle, PA: 2024.</mark>

"The chief way by which the saints have communion with the Father is love--free, undeserved, eternal love" (15).

"It is the name of God as Father which Christ declares to those who are given him out of the world, #John_17:6, and this is what Christ leads us to, because he is the only wya of going to God as a Father, #John_14:5-6. He leads us to God as love. By this, Christ gives us the rest which he promised us. We believe in God through Christ, #1_Peter_1:21). Faith seeks out a place for the soul to rest. This rest is presented to the soul by Christ, the Mediator. By Christ, the soul has access into the Father's love, #Ephesians_2:18" (20-21).

"And God commands us to love him with all our heart, soul, strength, and mind, #Luke_10:27. This is the response God wants from us in return for his love to us." (21) --> God's [[5.01 The Properties (or Attributes) of God | attributes]] are on full display in the communion with Him. 

"The Father loves us and chose us before the foundation of the world. And that love of the Father led him to bless us with every spiritual blessing in the heavenly places in Christ. ... So love is first poured out on Christ and from him it flows down to us. ... Christ is the well of salvation into which the water of God's love is poured. We then draw by faith from Christ, the well of salvation, the water of God's love" (24-25).

"The love of the Father is unchangeable. It is because his love is fixed and unchangeable that the Father shows us infinite patience and forbearance. The love of the Father is selective. You do not hold communion with God in anything until you receive it by faith" (34).

"You will never experience the sweetness of his love until you receive it. You must, then, continually remind yourself that God loves you and embraces you with his free eternal love" (24-25).

## Communion with Jesus Christ, the Son of God

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Owen, John. Communion with God. Banner of Truth Trust, Carlisle, PA: 2024.</mark>

"The fellowship which the saints have with the Son of God, Jesus Christ our Lord, is fellowship with him as Mediator" (43) --> fellowship via [[13.03 The Intercessory Work of Christ | intercessory work of Christ]]

"The whole book called "*the Song fo Solomon'* describes the communion between the Lord Christ and his saints. The Lord Christ, the eternal wisdom of the Father, who makes him wisdom to us, sets p a spiritual house in which he makes provision for the entertainment of those guests whom he so freely invites" (51).

"Scripture shoes us that we hold communion with the Lord Jesus in grace by a marriage relationship. Christ is married to use and we to him. This spiritual relation is accompanied with mutual love, and so in this fellowship with Christ we experience and enjoy all the excellent things which are in him" (61).
