## The Doctrine of the Trinity in History

- DeYoung, Kevin. Daily Doctrine. Wheaton, IL: Crossway, 2025.

"If any doctrine makes Christianity Christian, then surely it is the doctrine of the Trinity. In his work, On the Trinity, Augustine of Hippo observed that in no other subject is error more dangerous, inquiry more laborious, or the discovery of truth more profitable" (60).

"The doctrine of the Trinity can be summarized in seven statements:

1. There is only one God
2. The Father is God
3. The Son is God
4. The Holy Spirit is God
5. The Father is not the Son
6. The Son is not the Holy Spirit
7. The Holy Spirit is not the Father" (62).

"The shape of Trinitarian orthodoxy is finally rounded off by text that hint at the plurality of persons in the Godhead (Genesis 1:1-2; Ps 2:7; Dan 7:9-14)--texts like 1 Corinthians 8:6 that places Jesus Christ as Lord right int he middle of the Jewish Shema, and dozens of text that speak of Father, Son, and Holy Spirit in the same breath, equating the three in rank while assuming distinction of personhood" (62).

"The three persons of the Trinity are not three existences, as if they were independent beings; they are three subsistences, meaning each person (hypostasis) shares the same essence and can be identified equally as God. The three persons are distinguished by their personal properties, that is, by how each person relates to the other two" (65).

- Bavinck, Herman. Reformed Dogmatics: Abridged in One Volume. Grand Rapids, MI: Baker Academic, 2011.

"The seeds that developed into the full flower of New Testament trinitarian revelation are already planted in the Old Testament. Elohim, the living God, creates by speaking his word and endowing his spirit. The world comes into being by a threefold cause: the word of God, the World hypostasized as Wisdom, and the Spirit of God" (271).

- Grudem, Wayne. Systematic Theology. Grand Rapids, MI: Zondervan Academic. 2020.

"God eternally exists as three persons, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, and each person is fully God, and there is one God" (269).

"The doctrine of the Trinity can best be discussed briefly in connection with various propositions, which constitute an epitome of the faith of the Church on this point

1. There is in the Divine Being but one indivisible essence. God is one in His essential being or constitutional nature.
2. In this one Divine Being, there are three Persons or individual subsistences, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit.
3. The whole undivided essence of God belongs equally to each of the three persons.
4. A specific, definite order marks the subsistence and operation of the three persons in the divine Being.
5. There are specific personal attributes by which the three persons are distinguished.

- Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.

6. The Church confesses the Trinity to be a mystery beyond the comprehension of man" (76-78).

- Bray, Gerald. God Has Spoken: A History of Christian Theology. Wheaton, IL: Crossway, 2024.

"Modalism. This was the belief that, although God manifested himself under different names, behind the scenes, he was the same being who was playing different parts in a cosmic drama. Partipassianism, which is the belief that the Father suffered and died on the cross" (189-90).

"Economic Trinitarianism was a series of attempts to explain the work of God in the world according to the different dispensations of his revelation" (191)

"God the Father was a transcendent being who was quite different from the world he had made. These mediators were revealed to Christians as the Son, who became a man in Jesus Christ, and the Holy Spirit, who was sent after the Son's return to heaven to dwell in the hearts of believers. Christians recognized that the Son and the Holy Spirit were both divine, so that through them they had an access to the Father that would otherwise have been denied, but precisely how the three related to each other remained undefined" (193).

God-in-himself (autotheos)

"Being outside time and space, the Father gave birth to the Son in the timeless dimension of reality, so it cannot be said that there was ever a time when he did not exist. This was the Second God (deurteros theos) who was like this Father in every respect except that his divinity is derived from someone other than himself. The Son was eternally subject to his Father as a second-in-command, employed to do things in and with the created order that the transcendent Father either could not or would not do himself (203).

"As for the Holy Spirit, Origen saw him as deriving from the Father through the Son, who was the immediate source of his power and attributes. Origen defined the Father as the fountainhead of deity" (204).

"Origen insisted that Father, Son, and Holy Spirit were three identities (hypostases) in the eternal being of the one God" (203).

### Pre-Reformation Positions

- DeYoung, Kevin. Daily Doctrine. Wheaton, IL: Crossway, 2025.

"The Apostle's Creed is divided into three sections based on the Trinity: I believe in God the Father. I believe in Jesus Christ his only Son, our Lord, I believe in the Holy Spirit" (61).

"The Athanasian Creed claims, 'This is the catholic faith: that we worship one God in trinity and the trinity in unity, neither blending their persons, nor dividing their essence. For the persons of the Father is the distinct person, the person of the Son is another, and the Holy Spirit, still another. But the divinity of the Father, Son, and the Holy Spirit is one, their glory equal their majesty coeternal" (61).

"Orthodox Trinitarianism rejects Adoptionism, which holds that the power of God came upon Jesus at his baptism, thereby adopting him into the Godhead. It also rejects Monarchianism, which holds that there is only one supreme divine person and maintains that the Son and the Spirit subsist in the divine essence as impersonal attributes. It rejects Modalism and Sabellianism, which believe that Father, Son, and Holy Spirit are different names for the same God acting in different roles or manifestations. It rejects Arianism and all forms of ontological subordinationism that deny the full deity of Christ. Finally, Orthodox Trinitarianism rejects all forms of tritheism, which teach that the three members of the Godhead are three distinct beings and three separate Gods" (65).

"The doctrinal formulation approved at the Council of Nicaea and the subsequent Nicene Creed adopted at the Council of Constantinople affirmed that the Holy Spirit proceeds from the Father. At the same time, I sympathize with the East's initial reasons for being wary of the filioque from the Father and the Son.

1. The Holy Spirit is sent from the Father and the Son (John 16:7).
2. The Holy Spirit is often called the Spirit of Christ (Rom 8:9; Gal 4:6; 1 Peter 1:11)
3. Jesus tells the disciples that the Spirit glorifies him, takes what is his, and will declare it to them. If the Son glorifies the Father and speaks only what the Father gives him. (John 16:13-15)
4. Christ breathed out the Spirit on his disciples in time (John 20:22) (67-68).

- Bavinck, Herman. Reformed Dogmatics: Abridged in One Volume. Grand Rapids, MI: Baker Academic, 2011.

"Irenaeus very clearly enunciates the unity of the Father, the Son, and the Spirit, emphatically maintaining their full divinity. Tertullian was the first to deduce the Trinity of persons from the very beginning of God rather than from the person of the Father, thus clearly distinguishing and maintaining unity. Three persons are of one substance, condition, and power: together they constitute one God" (234-35).

"Father, Son, and Holy Spirit are three from eternity but with one essence and the same attributes. God does not become anything: he is what he is eternally" (226).

"Samosatan firmly denied Christ's preexistence and deity: it was an Adoptionist Christology" (228).

"Athanasius of Alexander repeatedly appeals to Ephesians 4:6, saying that as Father, God, is above us all, as Son he is thought all, and as Spirit he is in all, and that the Father creates and re-creates all things through the Son in Spirit" (240).

### Post-Reformation Positions

- DeYoung, Kevin. Daily Doctrine. Wheaton, IL: Crossway, 2025.

"[The Belgic Confession](https://www.crcna.org/welcome/beliefs/confessions/belgic-confession) states, 'In keeping with this truth and Word of God we believe in one God, who is of a single essence, in whom there are three persons, really, truly, and eternally distinct according to their incommunicable property,--namely, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit" (61).

"The Westminster Confession of Faith gives a succinct definition of the doctrine of the Trinity:

In the unity of the Godhead there by three persons, of one substance, power, and eternity: God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost: the Father is of none; neither begotten, nor proceeding; the Son is eternally begotten of the Father; the Holy Ghost eternally proceeding from the Father and the Son" (64).

- Bavinck, Herman. Reformed Dogmatics: Abridged in One Volume. Grand Rapids, MI: Baker Academic, 2011.

"The immanent relations of the three persons in the divine being also manifest themselves outwardly ad extra. All Good's outward works are common to the three persons and indivisible. There is an appropriation of properties and work to each person" (239).