## God as Trinity in Unity

- DeYoung, Kevin. Daily Doctrine. Wheaton, IL: Crossway, 2025.

"Although the word Trinity is famously absent from the Bible, the theology behind the word can be found in many verses. For starters, some verses speak of God's oneness #Deuteronomy_6:4; #Isaiah_44:6; #1_Timothy_1:17)" (62).

"The Greek term used to describe the eternal mutual indwelling of the person of the Trinity is perichoresis." (69). This means that Father, Son, and Holy Spirit cohere here in such a way that the persons are always and forever with and in one another, yet without merging, blending, or confusing. Only by affirming the mutual indwelling of each other can we worship our triune God as truly three and truly one.

The persons of the Godhead can be distinguished in two ways: (1) by their works ad extra and (2) by their mode of operating ad extra. However, opera Trinitatis ad extra sunt indivisa affirms that the Trinity's three persons share one operational principle. Three agents act, but these three share one agency by which they act. Scripture testifies that creation, redemption, and providence are each the work of the whole Trinity" (71).

- Bavinck, Herman. Reformed Dogmatics: Abridged in One Volume. Grand Rapids, MI: Baker Academic, 2011.

"The Son and the Father are true God" (234).

- Grudem, Wayne. Systematic Theology. Grand Rapids, MI: Zondervan Academic. 2020.

"Within the one unified will of God, we must say that there have been three distinct expressions of the will by the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit" (307).

- Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.

"When we speak of the Trinity of God, we refer to a trinity in unity, and to a unity that is tribal" (73).

"God's life stands out clearly before us in Scripture as a personal life; and it is, of course, of the greatest importance to maintain the personality of God, for without it there can be no religion in the real sense of the word: no prayer, no personal communion, no trustful reliance and no confident hope. Since man is created in the image of God, we learn to understand something of the personal life of God from the contemplation of personality as we know it in man" (73).

"In God there are three individuals alongside of, and separate from, one another, but only personal self-distinctions within the Divine essence, which is not generically, but also numerically, one" (77).

"The divine essence is not divided among the three persons, but is wholly with all its perfections in each one of the persons, so that they have numerical unity of essence. The divine nature is distinguished from the human nature in that it can subsist wholly and indivisibly in more than one person. While three persons among men have only a specific unity of nature or essence, that is, share in the same kind of nature or essence, the persons in the Godhead have a numerical unity of essence, that is, possess the identical essence" (77).

"The Father is neither begotten by, nor proceeds from any other person; the Son is eternally begotten of the Father, and the Spirit proceeds from the Father and the Son from all eternity" (78)."

- Bray, Gerald. The Doctrine of God: Contours of Christian Theology. Downers Grove, IL: InterVarsity Press, 1993.

"Trinity, there would be no Christianity. Our belief in the saving work of Christ, the Son of God, and in the indwelling presence of God the Holy Spirit demands that we worship God in that" (111).

### Three Persons Considered Separately.

#### The Father

- DeYoung, Kevin. Daily Doctrine. Wheaton, IL: Crossway, 2025.

"Then there are a myriad of passages which demonstrate that God is Father #John_6:27; #Titus_1:4" (62).

- Bavinck, Herman. Reformed Dogmatics: Abridged in One Volume. Grand Rapids, MI: Baker Academic, 2011.

"The spirit of God is the principle of all life and well-being, of all the gifts and powers int eh sphere of revelation: of course, #Judges_3:10; #Judges_6:34; #Judges_11:29; #Judges_12:25; #1_Samuel_11:6, of physical strength #Judges_14:6; #Judges_15:14 of artistic skill #Exodus_28:3; #Exodus_31:3-5; #Exodus_35:31-35; #1_Chronicle_28:12-19, of the ability to govern #Numbers_11:178; #1_Samuel_16:13 of intellect and wisdom #Job_32:8; #Isaiah_1:2, of holiness and renewal #Psalm_51:12; #Isaiah_63:10, and of prophecy and prediction #Numbers_11:25; #Numbers_24:2-3; #Micah_3;8" ( 281).

- Grudem, Wayne. Systematic Theology. Grand Rapids, MI: Zondervan Academic. 2020.

"God the Father is God. This is evident from the first verse of the Bible, where God created the heaven and the earth" (276).

- Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.

"he only works that is peculiar to the Father exclusively is that of active generation" (80).

"All the opera ad extra of God are works of the triune God, but in some of these works the Father is evidently in the foreground, such as: (1) Designing the work of redemption, include the [[7.02 Predestination|Predestination]], of which the Son was Himself an object; (2) the works of [[7.03 Creation|creation]] and [providence](onenote:7%20The%20Divine%20Decrees%20of%20God.one#7.04%20Providence&section-id={E6F87D6A-A43A-9D47-B271-7D3F2282EF1B}&page-id={54E1CECB-67DE-C64B-9BEF-D50A774D93D6}&end&base-path=https://d.docs.live.net/fc52dea27c35b98d/Documents/Reformed%20Dogmatics/II.%20Theology%20Proper), especially in their initial stages and (3) the work of representing the Trinity in the Counsel of Redemption, as the holy and righteous [[4.01 The Existence of God|the being of God]]" (80).

- Work of redemption, including election #Psalm_2:7-9; #Psalm_40:6-9; #Isaiah_53:10; #Matthew_12:32; #Ephesians_1:3-6
- Creation and providence #1_Corinthians_8:6; #Ephesians_2:9)
- Council of Redemption #Psalm_2:7-9; #Psalm_40:6-9; #John_6:37; #John_17:4-7)
#### The Son

- DeYoung, Kevin. Daily Doctrine. Wheaton, IL: Crossway, 2025.

"We have scores of text that prove the deity of Jesus Christ, the Son--passages like #John_1:1, #John_8:58, #Colossians_2:9, #Hebrews_1:3, and #Titus_2:13. And this is to say nothing of the worship Christ willing received from his disciples #Luke_24:52; #John_20:28 and the charges of blasphemy leveled against him for making himself equal with God #Mark_2:7" (62).

"Speaking of Jesus as fully divine includes #Hebrews_1:3, where the author says that Christ is the exact image of the nature or being of God--meaning that God the Son exactly duplicates the being or nature of God and the Father in every way.

- Grudem, Wayne. Systematic Theology. Grand Rapids, MI: Zondervan Academic. 2020.

"The eternal generation of the Son implies that (1) the Son is of the same nature as the Father, (2) the Son is a distinct person from the Father, and (3) there is a specific order in the relationship between Father and Son" (297).

"It is quite evident that Jesus Christ is represented as the son of God in Scripture, irrespective of His position and work as Mediator:

- He is spoken of as the Son of God from a pre-incarnation standpoint, for instance, in #John_1:14 and #Galatians_4:4.
- He is called the only-begotten Son of God or the Father, a term that would not apply to Him if He were the Son of God only in official or in an ethical sense #John_1:14; #John_3:16; #1_John_4:9
- In some passages, it is abundantly evident from the context that the name is indicative of the deity of Christ #John_5:18-25

- Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.

- While Jesus teaches His disciples to speak of God, and to address Him as our Father" (81).

"Jesus as the Son of God claims a unique knowledge of God, a knowledge such as no one else can possess" (81).

God is even called the God of the Son, #2_Corinthians_11:31; #Ephesians_1:3, and is sometimes mentioned as God in distinction from the Lord, #John_17:3, #1_Corinthians_8:6, #Ephesians_4:5. The name "Son of God" is given to Jesus also in view of the fact that He owed His birth to the paternity of God" (81).

Begotten - "The name firstborn is found in #Colossians_1:15 and #Hebrews_1:6 and emphasizes the fact of the eternal generation of the Son. It simply means that He was before all creation" (82).

filiation -- the Son shares with the Father in the spiration of the Spirit

"It is a necessary act of God. Origen was one of the very first to speak of the generation of the Son, regarding it as an act dependent on the Father's will and therefore free. The generation of the Son must be regarded as a necessary and perfectly natural act of God. It is an act of the Father's necessary will" (82).

"IF all things are out of the Father, they are through the Son, #1_Corinthians_8:6. This applies in the natural sphere, where all things are created and maintained through the Son, #John_1:3, #Hebrews_1:2,3" (84).

#### The Spirit

- DeYoung, Kevin. Daily Doctrine. Wheaton, IL: Crossway, 2025.

"We have similar texts that assume the deity of the Holy Spirit, calling him an eternal Spirit (Heb 9:14) and using God interchangeably with the Holy Spirit #Acts_5:3-4; #1_Corinthians_3:16; #1_Corinthians_6:19) without any embarrassment or need for explanation" (62).

- Grudem, Wayne. Systematic Theology. Grand Rapids, MI: Zondervan Academic. 2020.

"The Holy Spirit is also fully God" (279).

- Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.

"The Hebrew term by which He is designated is ruach and the Greek pneuma, both of which are like the Latin spiritus, derived from roots which mean to breathe. Hence, they can also be rendered as breath #Genesis_2:7, #Genesis_6:17, #Ezekiel_37:5 or wind #Genesis_8:1; #1_Kings_19:11; #John_3:8)" (84).

## The Triune God of Glory

- Wellum, Stephen. Systematic Theology Volume I. Brentwood, TN: B&H Academic Publishing, 2024.

"The Trinity is the indispensable mystery at the heart of all [[1.01 Theology|theology]]" (671).

- Bavinck, Herman. Reformed Dogmatics: Abridged in One Volume. Grand Rapids, MI: Baker Academic, 2011.

"The entire Christian belief system, all of special revelation, stands or falls with the confession of God's Trinity" (2:333).

## Definition of the Trinity

- Bavinck, Herman. Reformed Dogmatics: Abridged in One Volume. Grand Rapids, MI: Baker Academic, 2011.

"There is only one, true, and living God. There are also three persons in the Godhead: Father, Son, and Holy Spirit. These three persons are one true eternal God, the same in being, equal in power, glory, and authority, although distinguished by their personal properties or eternally ordered relations" (2:334).

1. There is only one true and living God, and God's oneness is defined by singularity and Simplicity.
2. This one God eternally exists as three persons: Father, Son, and Holy Spirit
3. The persons are distinguished by their order, eternal relations of origin, or personal property, unique and incommunicable. (paternity,  spiration)
4. In all of God's external works (creation, providence, and redemption) (in the divine economy), all three persons act inseparably and individually as the one God and according to their eternally ordered relations.

## Biblical Evidence for the Trinity

The word Trinity is not found in Scripture, but the concept is everywhere; we cannot make sense of God's self-revelation in redemptive history without recognizing that the Creator-Covenant Lord is Father, Son, and Holy Spirit.

- Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.

"The doctrine of the Trinity is very decidedly a doctrine of revelation" (74). See [[2.02 The Principium Cognoscendi Externum (Revelation)|The Principium Cognoscendi Externum]] for information on Revelation.

### Old Testament

#Genesis_1:1-3 teaches that God created the universe by the word and Spirit, a truth tracked throughout the Old Testament and a crucial way of distinguishing the divine persons from each other as the one God.

1. The relationship between God's word and the word is not personified as it is later in the OT, but is closely identified with God himself. God's word is God's powerful, authoritative self-expression; therefore, we cannot think of God apart from His word.

2. The use of *Elohim* is striking, especially when combined with the US language in #Genesis_1:26. Elohim is a plural noun that often takes the singular form.

3. There is also the messenger/angel of the Lord who appeared to Hagar (Genesis 16:6-13), Abraham #Genesis_18:22-11), Jacob #Genesis_32:25-33, Moses, #Exodus_3:2-6, Joshua, #Joshua_5:14-15, Gideon, #Judges_6:11-14, and David, #1_Chronicles_21:165, 18, 27. This personal appearance seems to be distinct from God.

"The Old Testament does not contain a full revelation of the trinitarian existence of God, but does contain several indications of it. The Bible never deals with the doctrine of the Trinity as an abstract truth. Still, it reveals the trinitarian life in its various relations as a living reality, to a certain extent in connection with the works of creation and providence, but particularly in relation to the work of redemption. The fuller revelation of the Trinity in the New Testament is because the Word became flesh, and the Holy Spirit took up His abode in the Church" (74-75).

"The Old Testament contains a clear anticipation of the fuller revelation of the Trinity in the New Testament" (75).

### New Testament

- Wellum, Stephen. Systematic Theology Volume I. Brentwood, TN: B&H Academic Publishing, 2024.

1. Creator-covenant Lord is one. From Genesis to Revelation, Scripture teaches a strict monolithic monotheism grounded in the Creator-creature distinction. God's oneness is singularity and simplicity, and in terms of the latter, God is one with himself, the eternal self-sufficient God who shares his glory with no one" (683).

- Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.

"The New Testament offers the clear revelation of God sending His Son into the world, #John_3:16, #Galatians_4:4; Hebrews 1:6; 1 John 4:9; and of both the Father and the Son, sending the Spirit, John 14:26; 15:26; 16:7, Galatians 4:6. We find the Father addressing the Son, Mark 1:11; Luke 3:22; the Son communion with the Father, Matthew 11:25; 26:39, John 11:41; 12:27 and the Holy Spirit praying to God in the hearts of believers, Romans 8:26" (75).

## Trinitarian Cooperation in Inspiration

- Horton, Michael. The Christian Faith: A Systematic Theology for Pilgrims On the Way. Grand Rapids, MI: Zondervan Publishing, 2011.

"In every external work of the Godhead, the Father speaks in the Son, and by the perfecting agency of the Spirit. In salvation, the Father gives the Son, the Son gives the Spirit, and the Spirit provides the Son with a bride. Jesus himself taught that all Scripture pointed to him. Its authority and its content are linked via [[2.02 The Principium Cognoscendi Externum (Revelation)|the Principium Cognoscendi Externum]] (156).