- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.</mark>

"The problem of the origin of the evil that is in the world has always been considered as one of the profoundest problems of philosophy and theology. It is a problem that naturally forces itself upon the attention of man, since the power of evil is both great and universal, is an ever-present blight on life in all its manifestations, and is a matter of daily experiences in the life of every man. Philosophes were compelled to confront the problem, particularly the moral evil, that exists in the world. To some, it seemed to be the natural constitution of things. Others, however, were convinced that it had a voluntary origin, that is, that it originated in the free choice of man, either in the present or in some previous existence. These are much closer to the truth as it is revealed in the Word of God" (215).

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">DeMarest, Bruce. *The Cross and Salvation: The Doctrine of Salvation*. Crossway, Wheaton, IL: 1997.</mark>

"Puritan Joseph Alleine wrote, O miserable man, what a deformed monster has sin made you! God made you little lower than the angels; sin has made you little better than the devils" (29).

"Dietrich Bonhoeffer wrote Only the man who is taken up in Christ is a real man" (29).

"Free will in common parlance means that within the constraints of one's nature, a person possesses (1) the power of self-determination, to what one desires, and (2) the uncoerced ability to choose between alternatives. But rebellion against God and the habitual practice of sin turn God-given freedom into sinful necessity. A man's free will, indeed, avails for nothing, except to sin, if he knows not the way of truth" (74-75).

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Hoekema, Anthony. Created in God's Image. Cambridge, UK: Wm B. Eerdmans Publishing Company: 1986.</mark>

"Berkouwer suggests that Reformed theologians made this distinction for two reasons: they recognized that (1) man, though fallen, remains [[8.02 The Nature of Man|man]]; and (2) man, through his [[9.03 The Transmission of Sin|fall into sin]], has lost that conformity to God's will which marked his life before the Fall" (59).

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Owen, John. Communion with God. Banner of Truth Trust, Carlisle, PA: 2024.</mark>

"If we would walk with God, we must agree with him #Amos_3:3. By nature, God and man are enemies #Romans_8:7. Walking with God is the last thing an enemy of God seeks. Only in Christ can foolish men learn the wisdom of walking with God" (111)

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Saint Augustine. *City of God*. Translated by Henry Bettenson. London, England: Penguin Books, 2003. </mark>

For no one is going to say that he does any service to a spring by drinking from it, or to the light by beholding it. If in times gone by our ancestors offered other sacrifices to God, in the shape of animal victims, we are to understand that the significance of those acts was precisely the same as that of those now performed amongst us. Thus, we are to know that the importance of those acts was precisely the same as that of those visible sacrifices, the sacraments, the sacred sign, of the invisible sacrifice. The sacrifice offered to God is a broken spirit; God will not despise a heart that is broken and humbled (377).

The wickedness is not natural, sin being due to an act of will, not to nature as created (448).

There can be no doubt that the fault of wickedness supervenes upon a faultless natural state. Evil is contrary to nature; in fact, it can only harm nature, and it would not be a fault to withdraw from God were it not that it is more natural to adhere to him (448).

God was well aware that man would sin and so, become liable to death. God also foresaw, by his grace, that a community of godly men would be called to adoption as his sons. These men, with their sins forgiven, were to be justified by the Holy Spirit and then to enter into fellowship with the holy angels in eternal peace, when the last enemy, death, had been destroyed (503).

We did not yet possess forms individually created and assigned to us for us to live in them as individuals. Still, there already existed the seminal nature from which we were to be begotten. Hence, from the misuse of free will, a chain of disasters began; mankind is led from the original perversion, a kind of corruption at the root, right up to the catastrophe of the second death, which has no end (523).

## Historical View Respecting the Origin of Sin

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Bavinck, Herman. Reformed Dogmatics: Abridged in One Volume. Grand Rapids, MI: Baker Academic, 2011.</mark>

"The origin of sin is a mystery; it is not from God, and at the same time it is not excluded from his counsel" (340).

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.</mark>

"The earliest Church Fathers do not speak very definitely on the origin of sin, though the idea that originated in the voluntary transgression and fall of Adam in paradise is already found in the writings of Irenaeus" (215).

"Adam was indeed the first sinner, but his disobedience cannot be regarded as the cause of the sin of the world. The sin of man is in some manner bound up with his creatureliness. The story of paradise conveys to man the cheering information that he need not necessarily be a sinner" (216).

"Moral evil that is in the world stands out clearly as sin, that is, as transgression of the law of God. Man ever appears in it as a transgressor by nature, and the question naturally arises, how did he acquire that nature? What does the Bible reveal on that point?"

1. God cannot be regarded as the author of sin.

God's eternal decree indeed rendered the entrance of sin into the world certain, but this should not be interpreted to mean that God is the cause of sin in the sense of being its responsible author. The idea is excluded by Scripture see #Job_34:10.

- God is a Holy God #Isaiah_6:3, and there is absolutely no unrighteousness in Him #Deuteronomy_32:4; #Psalm_92:16).

- He cannot be tempted with evil, and He tempteth no man #James_1:13

- When He created man, He created Him good and in His image. He positively hates sin #Deuteronomy_25:16; #Psalm_5:4; #Zechariah_8:17; #Luke_6:15

The **responsibility of man** in sin.

2. Sin originated in the angelic world

The Bible teaches that in attempting to trace the origin of sin, we must even go back to the fall of man, as described in #Genesis_3, and focus our attention on something that occurred in the angelic world. God created the host of angels, and they were all good as they came from the hand of their Maker #Genesis_1:31. However, a fall occurred in the angelic world, in which legions of angels fell away from God.

3. The [[9.02 The Characteristics of Sin|Origin of Sin]] in the human race

"Adam yielded to the temptation and committed the first sin by eating the forbidden fruit. But the matter did not stop there, for by that first sin, Adam became the bondservant of sin. Adam sinned not only as the father of the human race, but also as the representative head of all his descendants; and therefore the guilt of his sin is placed to their account, so that they are all liable to the punishment of death" (217-18).

"God adjudges all men to be guilty sinners in Adam, just as He adjudges all believers to be righteous in Jesus Christ" (281).
## The Nature of the First Sin | The Fall of Man

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.</mark>

"Adam placed himself in opposition to God, that he refused to subject his will to the will of GOd, to have God determine the course of his life; and that he actively attempted to take the matter out of God's hand, and to determine the future for himself. Man who had no claim on God, and who could only establish a claim by meeting the condition of the covenant of works, cut loose from God and acted as if he possessed certain rights as over against God" (218-19).

### Evolutionary Explanation of the Origin of Sin

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.</mark>

"A consistent theory of evolution cannot add to the doctrine of the fall, and several liberal theologians have rejected it as incompatible with the theory of evolution. This means that liberal theologians do not accept the narrative of the fall as a real historical account of what occurred in the Garden of Eden (221).

### The Results of the First Sin

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Athanasius of Alexandria. On the Incarnation. ~373. Verbi Dei. London: A.R. Mowbray and Company: 1970.</mark>

"To effect this re-creation, however, He had first to do away with death and corruption. Therefore, He assumed a human body, so that in death might once for all be destroyed, and that men might be renewed according to the Image" (29).

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.</mark>

"The immediate concomitant of the first sin, and therefore hardly a result of it in the strict sense of the word, was the total depravity of human nature. The contagion of his is at once spread through the entire man, leaving no part of his nature untouched, but vitting every power and faculty of body and soul" (222).

"Immediately connected with the preceding was the loss in communion with God through the Holy Spirit." (222).

"This change in the actual condition of man also reflected itself in the consciousness. There was, first of all, a consciousness of pollution, revealing itself in the sense of shame, and in the effort of our first parents to cover their nakedness" ( 222).

"Not only spiritual death, but physical death as well resulted from the first sin of man" (222).

Sin resulted in not only a change of the man's spiritual/physical death, but also a change in residence from the garden (paradise) to that of exile--away from the Lord.

