## The Nature of Evil

- Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.

"Sin is one of the saddest but also one of the most common phenomena of human life" (224).

- The philosophical theories respecting the nature of evil
- The dualistic theory posits the existence of an eternal principle of evil. It holds that in humans, the spirit represents the principle of good, while the body represents that of evil.
- There is something outside of God that is eternally independent of His will.
- This theory strips sin of its ethical character by reducing it to a physical entity.
- The theory that sin is merely privation
- The existence of sin is unavoidable. It cannot be referred to the agency of God, and is regarded as a simple negation or privation, for which no efficient cause is needed.
- Sin is a necessary evil.
- God is the author of the limitation from which sin results.
- The theory that sin is an illusion
- The theory that sin is a want of God-consciousness
- This is the view of Friedrich Schleiermacher: man's consciousness of sin is dependent on his God-consciousness. When the sense of God awakens in man, he is at once conscious of the opposition.
- This does not make God the author of sin; sin has no objective existence but exists only in man's consciousness.
- The theory of sin as a want of trust in God and opposition to His kingdom

- Alan Ritschl emphasizes here that sin is understood only from the standpoint of the Christian conscience.

- Believers are outside of the pale of the Christian religions, and they who are still stronger to the experiences of redemption, do not know of it.

- The Theory that sin is selfishness

- The theory that sin consists in the opposition of the lower propensities of human nature to a gradually developing moral consciousness

- It is the doctrine of sin constructed according to the theory of evolution.

- This theory assumes that humans have free will to choose when presented with a moral law, which they commit with a clear consciousness of an ethical ideal, and are therefore condemned by their conscience as evil.

The Fourfold State

1. In the Garden of Eden, man was able to sin and not to sin (*posse pecare*, *posse non peccare*)

- In this state, Adam was created innocent. Adam could obey God's command in the garden. There was nothing to prevent him from keeping the probationary command and living a life pleasing to God.

- Adam was innocent of both original and actual transgression.

2. After the fall, man was not able to sin (*non posse*, *non peccare*)

- Having disobeyed God, Adam plunged himself and the whole human race into a state of nature. This state is marked by sinfulness, misery, and inability.

- This is the inherent disposition of every human being born of natural descent, as seen in the [[9.03 The Transmission of Sin|Transmission of Sin]].

3. Once born against the Spirit, man is able not to sin (*posse non peccare*

- For those who are saved by the sovereign work of the Spirit, by faith alone in Christ alone, we enter into a state of grace. We are regenerated and united in a mystical union with Christ.

- We must still fight against indwelling sin. The state of grace is not free from temptation and the need for repentance.

- We are now slaves to righteousness, rather than slaves to sin.

4. In heaven, the redeemed will be unable to sin (*non posse peccare*)

- Upon death, we enter the eternal state.

- It is in this glorified state that we are fully restored, no longer sinning and no longer able to sin.

- This final state will be even better than man's first state, for whereas Adam could sin, in the eternal state, the redeemed will be so unalterably consecrated and made new that no possibility of further transgression will exist.

- Sproul, RC. Truths We Confess: A Systematic Exposition of the Westminster Confession of Faith. Orlando, FL: Reformation Trust, 2019.

"In creation, the human will had freedom and power to do what is good, to do what is well pleasing to God. Before the fall, human beings possessed the moral capacity to choose righteousness and obedience before God. But this endowment from God was mutable. Man was capable of change and falling away from his original disposition. Augustine of Hippo started that in creation were both posse peccare (able to sin) and posse non peccare (able not to sin). After the fall, we continued to be able to sin, posse peccare, but we lost the power or ability not to sin, posse non peccare. We were left in what Augustine called a state of moral ability" (233).

- Hoekema, Anthony. Created in God's Image. Cambridge, UK: Wm B. Eerdmans Publishing Company: 1986.

"Original sin includes both guilt and pollution. Guilt is a judicial or legal concept that describes one's relationship to the law — in this case, specifically to God's law. Guilt is the state of deserving condemnation or of being liable to punishment because the law has been violated. By original guilt, then, we mean that we deserve condemnation because Adam, our head and representative, broke God's law. Pollution, in distinction from guilt, is a moral concept; it has to do with our condition rather than our status before the law" (148-49).

## The Scriptural Idea of Sin

- Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.

"Sin should not be confused with physical evil, with that which is injurious or calamitous" (228).

"Sin is a moral evil" (228).

"Sin is not something passive, such as a weakness, a fault, or an imperfection for which we cannot be held responsible, but an active opposition to God, and a positive transgression of His law, which constitutes guilt. Sin is the result of a free but evil choice of man. This is the plain teaching of the Word of God #Genesis 3:1-6; Isaiah 48:8; Romans 1:18-32; 1 John 3:4)" (228).

"Man is either on the right side or on the wrong side (Matthew 10:32, 33; 12:30; Luke 11:23; James 2:10)" (229).

1. Sin is a specific kind of evil
2. Sin has an absolute character
3. Sin always has a relation to God and his will
4. Sin includes both guilt and pollution
5. Sin has its seat in the heart.
6. Sin does not consist exclusively in overt acts.
7. Sin has no independent existence.
8. Sin includes thoughts as well as acts.
9. Sin includes both guilt and pollution.
10. Sin is at root a form of pride.