- Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.

"Scripture and experience both teach us that sin is universal, and according to the Bible, the explanation for this universality lies in the fall of Adam" (Berkhof, *Systematic Theology*, 2019: 235).

"The whole human race was potentially and numerically present in Adam, and therefore sinned when he sinned and became corrupt when he became corrupt" (Berkhof, *Systematic Theology*, 2019: 235).

"According to Martin Luther, we are accounted guilty by God because of the indwelling sin inherited from Adam. John Calvin speaks in a somewhat similar vein. He holds that, since Adam was not only the progenitor but the root of the human race, his descendants are born with a corrupt nature; and that both the guilt of Adam's sin and their inborn corruption are imputed to them as sin" (Berkhof, *Systematic Theology*, 2019: 237).

**Perform a historical review**.

## The Universality of Sin

- Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.

"There are direct statements of Scripture that point to the universal sinfulness of man, such as #1_Kings_8:46; #Psalm_143:2, #Proverbs_20:9; #Ecclesiastes_7:20; #Romans_3:1-12, 19, 20, 23; #Galatians_3:22, #James_3:2; #1_John_1:8, 10" (238).

"Scripture teaches that sin is the heritage of man from the time of his birth, and is therefore present in human nature so early that it cannot possibly be considered as the result of imitation #Psalm_51:5; #Job_14:4; #John_3:6" (238).

"Children are never made an exception to this rule, the preceding passages #John_3:3, 5; #1_John_5:12. This is not contradicted by those passages which ascribe a certain righteousness to man, such as #Matthew_9:12; 13; #Acts_10:35, #Romans_2:14; #Philippines_3:6, #1_Corinthians_1:30)" (238).

- Hoekema, Anthony. Created in God's Image. Cambridge, UK: Wm B. Eerdmans Publishing Company: 1986.

"As a result of the Fall, sin has become universal, except for Jesus Christ; no person who ever lived on this earth has been free from sin" (140).

## The Connection of Adam's Sin with that of the Human Race


- Bavinck, Herman. Reformed Dogmatics: Abridged in One Volume. Grand Rapids, MI: Baker Academic, 2011.

"#Romans_7 does require some special attention on our part. Pelagians in all ages and most modern exegetes appeal to #Romans_7 to prove that the human mind or the spirit remains free from sin, which only resides in the flesh" (535).

- Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.

1. The denial of the connection: Some deny the causal connection of the sin of Adam with the sinfulness of the human race, either wholly or in part. See Semi-Pelagians or Socinians.

2. View of the connection:

a. The realist theory. The earliest method of explaining the connection between Adam's sin and the guilt and pollution of all his descendants was the realist theory. Individual men are not separate substances, but manifestations of the same general substance; they are numerically one. Human nature became corrupt and guilty in Adam. Consequently, every individualization of it in the descendants of Adam is also corrupt and guilty from the very beginning of existence (239-40).

b. The doctrine of the covenant of works, see [[3.02 Covenantalism|Covenantalism]], this implies that Adam stood in a twofold relationship to his descendants, namely that of the natural head of all humanity, and that of the representative head of the entire human race in the covenant of works (240).

c. The mediate imputation, which is a theory that denies that the gilt of Adam's sin is directly imputed to his descendants, and represents that matter as follows: Adam's descendants derive their innate corruption from his by a process of natural generation, and only based on that inherent depravity which they share with him are they also considered guilty of his apostasy (241).


## Sin in the Life of the Human Race

- Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.

"This sin is called original sin: (1) because it is derived from the original root of the human race; (2) because it is present in the life of every individual from the time of his birth, and therefore cannot be regarded as the result of imitation; and (3) because it is the inward root of all the actual sins that defile the life of man" (243).

### Original Sin

- Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.

"The free will of man was weakened by the fall" (243).

Two elements must be distinguished in original sin: (1) original guilt; (2) original pollution; (3) total depravity; (4) total inability.

"Original Guilt: The world guilt expresses the relation which sin bears to justice or, as the older theologians put it, to the penalty of the law. He who is guilty stands in a penal relation to the law" (244).

"The guilt of Adam's sin, committed by him as the federal head of the human race, is imputed to all his descendants" (245).

"Original pollution includes two things, namely, the absence of original righteousness, and the presence of positive evil" (245).

- DeYoung, Kevin. Daily Doctrine. Wheaton, IL: Crossway, 2025.

Augustine of Hippo proved himself to be the church's champion of sovereign grace. The fallen human will, Augustine taught, is in bondage to sin, utterly incapable of choosing the good., We can only be saved by grace" (120).

"Total inability captures the helplessness and hopelessness of the human will part from Christ" (120).

See the [Canons of Dort](), which provides the best succinct definition of total inability when it affirms that all people are conceived in sin and are born children of wrath, unfit for any saving good, inclined to evil, dead in their sins, and salves to sin; without the grace of the regenerating Holy Spirit they are neither willing nor able to return to God" (120).

*What is the relationship between Original Sin and human freedom?*

Objections to Original Sin include:

- It is inconsistent with moral obligations.
- It removes all motives for exertion.
- It encourages delay in conversion.

### Actual Sin

- Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.

"Roman Catholics and Arminians minimized the idea of original sin, and then developed doctrines, such as those of the washing away of original sin (though not only that) by baptism, and of sufficient grace, by which its seriousness is greatly obscured. The emphasis is altogether on actual sins. Pelagius, Socinians, modern liberal theologians, and-- strange as it may seem--also the Theology of Crisis, recognize only actual sins" (250).

- Bavinck, Herman. Reformed Dogmatics: Abridged in One Volume. Grand Rapids, MI: Baker Academic, 2011.

"Alan Ritschl reduced sin to actual sins; the law of sin is only a sum of individual sins" (355).

### The Unpardonable Sin

- Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.

"Several passages of Scripture speak of a sin that cannot be forgiven, after which a change of heart is impossible, and for which it is not necessary to pray. It is generally known as the sin or blasphemy against the Holy Spirit #Matthew_12:31; #Hebrews_6:4-6; #Hebrews_10:26; #1_John_5:16" (252).

"It is evidently a sin committed during the present life, which makes conversion and pardon impossible" (352).