- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.</mark>

"The slothful man comes to poverty, the drunkard brings ruin upon himself and his family, the fornicator contracts a loathsome and incurable disease, and the criminal is burdened with shame, and even when leaving the prison walls, finds it extremely hard to make a new start in life. The Bible speaks of such punishments in #Job_4:8; #Psalm_9:15; #Psalm_94:23; #Proverbs_5:22; #Proverbs_23:21; #Proverbs_24:14; #Proverbs_31:3" (255).

"Man is not saved from them by repentance and forgiveness" (255).

"The Bible speaks of penalties, which are in no sense that natural results or consequences of the sin committed #Exodus_32:33; #Leviticus_26:21; #Numbers_15:31; #1_Chronicles_10:13; #Psalm_11:6; #Psalm_75:8; #Isaiah_1:24; #Matthew_3:10; #Matthew_24:51)" (256).

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Saint Augustine. *City of God*. Translated by Henry Bettenson. London, England: Penguin Books, 2003. </mark>

So by the ineffable mercy of God even the penalty of man's offense is turned into an instrument of virtue, and the punishment of the sinner becomes the merit of the righteous (514).

For if those sinners had not sinned, they would not have died; the martyrs would sin, if they did not die. And so the former died because they sinned; and the latter do not sin, because they die. God had granted to faith so great a gift of grace that death, which all agree to be the contrary of life, has become the means by which men pass into life (514).

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Wellum, Stephen. *The 5 Solas Series: Christ Alone: The Uniqueness of Jesus as Savior*, Grand Rapids, MI: Zondervan, 2017.</mark>

God is forbearing and gracious, yet he is also holy and just. Where there is sin, the holy God must confront it and bring it to judgment, especially given the fact that sin is not first against an external order outside of God; it is against God. It is precisely this necessity in God to judge human sin that creates a severe tension in the biblical storyline and the covenantal relationship (45). 

For God to forgive, he must first satisfy himself, which is precisely what he does in God the Son incarnate, who bears our sin for us as our substitute (45). 
## Natural and Positive Penalties

### Nature and the Purpose of Punishment

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.</mark>

"The word punishment denotes pain or suffering inflicted because of some misdeed. More specifically, it may be defined as that pain or loss which is directly or indirectly inflicted by the Lawgiver, in vindication of His justice outraged by the violation of the law" (257).

"The law requires that sin be punished because of its inherent demerit, irrespective of all further considerations" (257).

"The penalty of sin does not proceed from the love and mercy of the Lawgiver but from His justice" (258).

1. To vindicate divine righteousness or justice.
2. To reform the sinner.
3. To deter men from sin.

### The Actual Penalty of Sin

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.</mark>

"The penalty with which God threatened man in paradise was the penalty of death. The death here intended is not the death of the body, but the death of man as a whole, death in the scriptural sense of the word" (259).

1. Spiritual Death
2. The sufferings of life
3. Physical Death
4. Eternal Death