## The Doctrine of the Perseverance of the Saints in History

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.</mark>

"The doctrine of the perseverance of the saints is to the effect that they who God has regenerated and effectually called to a state of grace, can neither totally nor finally fall away from the state, but shall certainly persevere therein to the end and be eternally saved" (567).

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">DeMarest, Bruce. *The Cross and Salvation: The Doctrine of Salvation*. Crossway, Wheaton, IL: 1997</mark>

For the Catholics --> the faithful who have committed venial sins suffer the pains of purgatory, but those who have perpetrated mortal sins are liable to eternal punishment. The guilt of mortal sins may be removed and saving grace restored by the sacrament of penance (433).

Catholics' view of perseverance under the heading of justification (433).

Arminians --> reject the doctrine of unconditional election and effectual grace and affirm unqualified free agency. Arminians posit conditional perseverance or the possibility of final apostasy in believers, and insist that the danger of a final fall from grace must not be taken lightly (434). 

John Wesley held that through neglect, believers can forfeit grace and by willful sin can lose their salvation and be damed (435). 

Gods eternal purpose to save, #John_6:39-40, his perfections of grace, ummutability, power, and faithfulness, #1_Peter_1:5; #2_Peter_1:3 (439).

Under the new covenant, Jesus taught that believers in the Son immediately possess eternal life, #John_3:15-16, #John_4:14, #John_5:24; #John_6:40, #1_John_5:11 (444).
### Statement of the Doctrine of Perseverance

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.</mark>

"Perseverance may be defined as that continuous operation of the Holy Spirit in the believer, by which the work of divine grace that is begun in the heart, is continued and brought to completion" (568).

### Proof for the Doctrine of Perseverance

1. Direct statements from Scripture:

- #John_10:27-29
- #Romans_11:29
- #Philippians_1:6
- #2_Thessalonians_3:3
- #2_Timothy_1:12

1. Inferential Proofs: The doctrine can be proved in inferential ways:

- From the doctrine of [[7.02 Predestination|election]]
- From the doctrine of the [[3.02 Covenantalism|covenant of redemption]]
- From the efficacy of the merits and [[13.03 The Intercessory Work of Christ|intersession]] of Christ
- From the [[14.04 The Mystical Union]] with Christ
- From the [[14.01 General and Special Operation of the Holy Spirit|work of the Holy Spirit]] in the heart.
- From the assurance of salvation.

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Bavinck, Herman. Reformed Dogmatics: Abridged in One Volume. Grand Rapids, MI: Baker Academic, 2011.</mark>

"Scripture speaks of the perseverance of the saints as it does of sanctification--as both gift and task. The New Testament repeatedly admonishes believers to remain faithful, to stay true to their Savior and Lord #Matthew_24:13; #John_15:1-10; #Romans_2:7-8; #Colossians_1:23; #Hebrews_2:1; #Hebrews_3:14; #Hebrews_6:11; #1_John_2:6; #1_John_3:6, even unto death #Revelations_2:10; it threatens heavily punishment for unfaithfulness #Ezekiel_18:24; #Matthew_13:20-21; #John_15:2; #Romans_11:20; #2_Timothy_2:12; #Hebrews_4:1; #Hebrews_6:4-8; #Hebrews_10:26-31; #2_Peter_2:18-22)" ( 584).

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Sproul, RC. Truths We Confess: A Systematic Exposition of the Westminster Confession of Faith. Orlando, FL: Reformation Trust, 2019.</mark>

"One of the most significant aspects of perseverance is the intercession of Christ. In the High Priestly Prayer, Jesus prayed that the Father would keep His elect from falling #John_17:11. We persevere only because God, in His grace and power, preserves us. In and of ourselves, each of us is capable of serious and radical falling, such as we saw in the life of David and in the life of Peter. Even as regenerate creatures, we are capable of full and final falling, I left to ourselves. But God does not lead His people by their own devices" (380-81).