## The Source of Church Power

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.</mark>

"Jesus Christ not only founded the Church, but also endowed it with the necessary power or authority. He is the Head of the Church, not only in an organic, but also in an administrative sense, that is, He is not only the Head of the body, but also the King of the spiritual commonwealth" (619).

"The Church of all ages is counted by their word #John_17:20; #1_John_1:3" (619).

"The officers in the Church receive their authority from Christ and not from men, even though the congregation is instrumental in putting them into office. This means on the one hand they do not obtain it at the hands of any civil authority, which has no power in ecclesiastical matters, and therefore cannot bestow any; but on the other hand, that they do not derive it from the people in general" ( 619).

## The Nature of this Power

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.</mark>

Spiritual power: "When the power of the Church is called a spiritual power, this does not mean that it is altogether internal and invisible, since Christ rules both body and soul, His word and sacraments address the whole man, the minister of the diaconate even has special references to physical needs. IT is a spiritual power, because the Spirit of God gives it #Acts_20:28 can only be exercised in the name of Christ and by the power of the Holy Spirit #John_20:22; #1_Corinthians_5:4), pertains exclusively to believers #1_Corinthians_5:12) and can only be exercised morally and spiritually #2_Corinthians_10:4)" (620).

The ministerial power "it is abundantly evident form Scripture that the power of the Church is no independent and sovereign power #Matthew_20:25; #Matthew_23:8; #2_Corinthians_10:4; #1_Peter_5:3 but a ministerial power #Acts_4:29; #Acts_20:24; #Romans_1:1) derived from Christ and subordinate to His sovereign authority over the Church #Matthew_29:18). It must be exercised in harmony with the Word of God and under the direction of the Holy Spirit" (620-21).