## Different Theories Respecting the Government of the Church

- Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.

"The view of Quakers and Darbyites "rejects all Church Government. According to them, every external Church formation necessarily degenerates and leads to results that are contrary to the spirit of Christianity. It exalts the human lament at the expense of the divine. It neglects the divinely given charisms and substitutes for them offices instituted by man. Consequently, it offers the Church the bulk of human knowledge rather than the vital communications of the Holy Spirit" (604).

The Erastian System regards the Church as a society which owes its existence and form to regulation enacted by the State. The officers of the Church are merely instructors or preachers of the Word, without any right or power to rule, except that which they derive from the civil magistrates" (604).

The episcopalian system "holds that Christ, as the Head of the Church, has entrusted the government of the Church directly and exclusively to an order of prelates or bishops, as the successors of the apostles; and that He has constituted these bishops a separate, independent and self-perpetuating order" (604)

The Roman Catholic system is the Episcopal system carried to its logical conclusion. The Roman Catholic system pretends to comprise, not only successors of the apostles, but also a successor to Peter, who is said to have had the primacy among the apostles, and whose successor is now recognized as the special representative of Christ" (605).

The Congregational System is also called the system of intendency. According to the principle, each church or congregation is a complete church, independent of every other. In such a Church, the governing power rests exclusively with the members of the church, who are entitled to regulate their own affairs" (605).

The national-church system, also known as the Collegial system, originated in Germany and was later introduced to the Netherlands. It proceeds on the assumption that the Church is a voluntary association, equal to the State. The separate churches or congregations are merely subdivisions of the one national Church" (606).

There are fundamental principles that need to be in place for the church:

1. Chris is the head of the Church and the source of all authority #Matthew_28:18; #Ephesians_1:20-22; #Philippians_2:10; #Revelations_7:14; #Revelations_19:16)
2. Christ exercises his authority by means of his royal word
3. [[13.01 The Offices of Christ|Christ as King]] has endowed the church with power
4. Christ provided for the specific exercise of these powers of representative organs
5. The power of the church resides primarily in the governing body of the local church

## The Officers of the Church

- Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.

"Different kinds of officers may be distinguished in the Church. A very general distinction is that between extraordinary and ordinary officers" (610).

### Extraordinary Officers

#### Apostles

- Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.

"Strictly speaking, this name applies only to the Twelve chosen by Jesus and to Paul; but it is also applied to certain apostolic men who assisted Pual in his work, and who were endowed with apostolic gift and graces #Acts_14:4; #1_Corinthians_9:5; #2_Corinthians_8:23; #Galatians_1:19) They, the apostles, received their commission directly from God or from Jesus #Mark_3:14; #Luke_6:13; #Galatians_1:1; and where witness to t the life of Chriest and his Resurrection #John_15:27; #Acts_1:21; #1_Corinthians_9:1 and where inspired by God in all their teaching #Acts_15:28; #1_Corinthians_2:13; #1_Thessalonians_4:8; #1_John_5:9-12" (610).

#### Prophets

- Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.

"The New Testament also speaks of prophets #Acts_11:28; #Acts_13:1; #Acts_15:32; #1_Corinthains_12:10; #1_Corinthians_13:2; #1_Corinthians_14:3 #Ephesians_2:20; #Ephesians_3:5; #Ephesians_4:11; #1_Timothy_1:18; #1_Timothy_4:14; #Revelations_11:6). Evidently the gift of speaking for the edification of the Church was highly developed in these prophets, and they were occasionally instruments in revealing mysteries and predicting future events" (610).

#### Evangelists

- Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.

"Mentioned in the Bible #Acts_21:8; #Ephesians_4:11; #2_Timothy_4:5)" (611).

### Ordinary Officers

#### Elders

- Allison, Gregg. Sojourners and Strangers: The Doctrine of the Church. Wheaton, IL: Crossway: 2012.

"The candidate for the pastoral office must be 'the husband of one wife' in the sense of being faithful to her and eschewing inappropriate relationships with all other women" (215).

- Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.

"These officers clearly had the oversight of the flock that was entrusted ot their care. They had to provide for it, govern it, and protect it, as the very household of God" (611).

Qualifications = #1_Timothy_3:1-5 and #Titus_1:5-9
#### Teachers

- Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.

"It is clear that elders were not originally teachers. There was no need to separate teachers at first, since there were apostles, prophets, and evangelists. In the course of time two circumstance sled to the distinction between the elder or overseers that were entrusted only with the government of the Church and heresies where also called upon to teaches, when the apostles died and heresies arose and increased, the task of those who were called on to become more exacting and demanded special preparation #2_Timothy_2:2; #Titus_1:9 (611-12).

#### Deacons