- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Bavinck, Herman. Reformed Dogmatics: Abridged in One Volume. Grand Rapids, MI: Baker Academic, 2011.</mark>

"Although the church's true membership is known only to God, we are not without guidance by which to discern the true church" (601).

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.</mark>

"The Reformed conception is that Christ, by the operation of the Holy Spirit, unites men with Himself, endows them with true faith, and thus constitutes the Church as His body, the communio fidelium or sanctorum" (575).

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Clowney, Edmund P. *Contours of Christian Theology: The Church*. Downers Grove, IL: InterVarsity Press, 1995.</mark>

The church needs to return to Areopagus --> Acts

"To be sure, if the church rather than Christ becomes the centre of our devotion, spiritual decay has begun. A doctrine of the church that does not centre on Christ is self-defeating and false" (15).

"I will build my church. To ignore his (Jesus') purposes is to deny his lordship" (15). 

"The church must show the bond of Christ's love that unites former enemies as brothers and sisters in the Lord" (16)

The church is the community of the Word, the Word that reveals the plan and purpose of God. In the church, the gospel is preached, believed, and obeyed. It is the pillar and ground of the truth because it holds fast the Scripture, #Philemon_2:16" (16).

"The doctrines of the church should be treated in close relation both to the doctrine of Christ and to the doctrine of the Spirit" (18).

"The apostle Peter weaves a tapestry of Old Testament language to describe the church, #Exodus_19:6, #Isaiah_43:20-21; #Hosea_1:6. The relationship between God and his people was disrupted by sin, so that Israel was made Lo-Ammi, Not my people, #Hosea_1:9, #Matthew_21:43, but Peter here hails the fulfillment of Hosea's promise" (29). 

"Now they join in the praise of God, who called them out of darkness into his light" (29).

"Israel is God's son, his spouse, his vine, his flock. In the New Testament, the church is Christ's flock, branches of the true vine, his bride, his body, and his temple, dwelling of the Holy Spirit, the home of God" (30).

"*ekklesia* and *qahal* denote an actual assembly, rather than a congregation, which may or may not be congregated. Generally, Paul does use it to describe the actual gathering of Christians, #1_Corinthians_14:19, #1_Corinthians_14:28, #1_Corinthians_14:34" (30).

"When Jesus speaks of the church, however, he uses a term rich with Old Testament meaning. Israel was God's assembly on the great day when God assembled them before him at Mount Sinai to make his covenant with them. He had brought them on eagle's wings to himself, #Exodus_19:4" (30). 

"Israel was an assembly because they gathered before God, appearing in his presence, #Deuteronomy_4:10" (30).

"God's people no longer gather in Jerusalem. They now worship in the city of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem, #Hebrews_12:22. The earthly city was a shadow of the heavenly reality. S"

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Parsons, Burke, editor. *Table Talk Magazine: Roma, The East, and the Ancient Tradition of the Church*. Sanford, FL: Ligonier Ministries, October 2025.</mark>

"We who profess faith in Christ but have not yet passed into glory constitute the visible church militant, called to wage war against the world, the flesh, and the devil, #Ephesians_6:10-20" (36).

## The Methods of Ecclesiology

Three crucial issues must be addressed, and one's decisions on these issues will, to a great extent, determine one's theology of the church. (See Allison, Sojourners and Strangers, 2012: 39-43). You can also find an additional discussion on this topic in the Hermeneutical Framework section, where we explore [[3.02 Covenantalism|Covenantalism]], [[3.03 Progressive Covenantalism|Progressive Covenantalism]], and [[3.04 Dispensationalism|Dispensationalism]].

1. Absolute continuity: maintained that the entirety of the Old Testament legal material--including its many moral laws, civil rules, and ceremonial regulations--continues in force today and thus is binding on Christians.
2. Modern continuity holds that while the Old Testament legal material generally continues in force today, it has a transformed view of the many changes that have occurred with the coming of Jesus Christ and that have been enacted or verified by the New Testament.
3. Absolute discontinuity (hyperdispensationalism) maintained that nothing in the Old Testament legal materials continues in force today and thus it is not binding on Christ. The stipulations and regulations of the Old Testament have been rendered null and void for Christina living in the new covenant. This position does not result in antinomianism — being without law — for Christians are governed by the law of Christ #Galatians_6:2; #1_Corinthians_9:21.
4. Modern discontinuity (progressive dispensationalism), like the above, holds to discontinuity between the Old and New Testaments, with these modifications: the degree of discontinuity is significant but not total.

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Allison, Gregg. Sojourners and Strangers: The Doctrine of the Church. Wheaton, IL: Crossway: 2012.</mark>

"When Scripture offers prescriptive teaching for the church (e.g, Jesus' instruction about church discipline, #Matthew_18:15-20, these prescriptions must be incorporated into one' ecclesiology and become narrative for all churches" (43).

### Basic Approaches to Ecclesiology

- Functional ecclesiology seeks to define and discuss the church in terms of its activities, roles, and ministries.
- Teleological ecclesiology: attempts to define and discuss the church in terms of telos, or purpose/goals.
- Ontological ecclesiology seeks to define and discuss the church in terms of its attributes or characteristics.

- "Unity, holiness, catholicity (or universality), and apostolicity were the four specific characteristics affirmed by the earliest Christians in their discussion and confessions of the nature of the church" (Allison, Sojourners and Strangers, 2012: 51).

"The church is not thought of in terms of its essence, but of its existence--an openly existentialist interpretation" (52).

## Scriptural Names of the Church and the Doctrine of the Church in History

### Scriptural Names for the Church

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.</mark>

"The Old Testament employs two words to designate the Church, namely qakal and 'edhah, which means to appoint or to meet or come together at an appointed place. These two words are sometimes used indiscriminately, but were not, at first, strictly synonymous. It seems that the actual meeting was sometimes a meeting of the representative of the people #Deuteronomy_4:10; #Deuteronomy_18:16; #1_Kings_14:5; #Jeremiah_26:17" (577).

"The New Testament also uses two words derived from the Septuagint, namely ekklesia and kaleo, which means to call out and to come or to bring together. This is used exclusively to denote either the religious gatherings of the Jews or the buildings in which they assembled for public worship #Matthew_4:23; #Acts_13:43; #Revelations_2:9; #Revelations_3:9.

"Ekklesia designates a circle of believers in some definite locally, a local church, irrespective of the question whether these believers are or are not assembled for worship. #Acts_5:11; #Acts_11:26; #1_Corinthians_11:18; #1_Corinthians_14:19" (Berkhof, Systematic Theology, 2021: 578).

#Romans_16:23; #1_Corinthians_16:19; #Colossians_4:15; #Philemon_2 = Church in the house of an individual.

#Acts_9:31 = a group of churches, like the church of Judea, Galilee, and Samaria.

#1_Corinthians_10:32; #1_Corinthians_11:22; #1_Corinthians_12:28 = serves to denote the whole body, throughout the world, of those who outwardly profess Christ and organize for purposes of worship, under the guidance of appointed officers.

#Ephesians_1:22; #Ephesians_3:10; #Ephesans_5:23-25; #Colossians_1:18 = signifies the whole body of the faithful, whether in heaven or on earth.

### The Doctrine of the Church in History

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.</mark>

"The rise of heresies made it imperative to name some characteristics by which the true catholic Church could be known. This tended to fix the attention on the outward manifestation of the Church. The Church began to be conceived as an external institution, ruled by a bishop as a direct successor of the apostles, and in possession of the true tradition. The catholicity of the Church was rather strongly emphasized" (580).

"The unity of the Church was thus based on the unity of the bishops. They who do not subject themselves to the bishop forfeit the fellowship of the Church and also their salvation, since there is no salvation outside of the Church" (581).

"The true Church is the catholic Church, in which the apostolic authority is continued by episcopal succession" (581).

"He regarded the Church as the spiritual communion of those who believe in Chrit, and restored the scriptural idea of the priesthood of all believers. he maintained the unity of the Church, but distinguished two aspects of it, the one visible and the other invisible" (582).

"The invisible Church becomes visible, not by the rule of bishops and cardinals, nor in the headship of the Pope, but ty the pure administration of the Word and of the sacraments. He admitted that the visible Church will always contain a mixture of pious and wicked members" (582).

## The Nature of the Church

### The Essence of the Church

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.</mark>

"The congregation of all the faithful, who being baptized, profess the same faith, partake of the same sacraments, and are governed by their lawful pastors, under one visible head on earth" (585).

"The Church in the present dispensation is a militant Church, that is, she is called unto, and is actually engaged in, holy warfare" (588).

"If the Church on earth is a militant church, then the church in heaven is a triumphant Church" (588).

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">DeYoung, Kevin. Daily Doctrine. Wheaton, IL: Crossway, 2025.</mark>

"The church is militant and triumphant. God's people must fight and travail here on earth. There is a church in heaven gathered in glorified repose. The church must be at war--against sin, the flesh, and the devil, while also enjoying the Sabbath rest won for us in Christ" (278).

The Church, being a many-sided entity, has naturally also been defined from more than one point of view:

1. from the point of view of the [[7.02 Predestination|election]]
2. from the point of view of [[15.01 Conversion|effectual calling]]
3. from the point of view of [[18.02 Christian Baptism|baptism]] and profession

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Allison, Gregg. Sojourners and Strangers: The Doctrine of the Church. Wheaton, IL: Crossway: 2012.</mark>

"Christ is sanctifying, nourishing, and cherishing this universal church" (62).

"But these faithful and obedient followers of Jehovah, these people of God, did not constitute the church. The people of God, from the post-Adamic covenant to the post-Mosaic covenant and up to the new covenant, did not constitute the church (80).

"The church is the people of God who have been saved through repentance and [[15.03 Faith|faith]] in Jesus Christ and have been incorporated into his body through [[18.02 Christian Baptism|baptism]] with the Holy Spirit" (29).

### The Church and the Kingdom of God

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Allison, Gregg. Sojourners and Strangers: The Doctrine of the Church. Wheaton, IL: Crossway: 2012.</mark>

"As any kingdom is ruled by a king, in the matter before us, God is the king of all the earth #Psalm_47:7; the Most High who rules the kingdom of men and gives it to whom he will #Daniel_4:25; #Psalm_22:28. This aspect of the kingdom focuses on God's reign or rule over all the created order--he is the King who exercises absolute sovereignty over his kingdom, which consist of everything he has brought into and keeps in existence" (90).

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.</mark>

"The kingdom of God is primarily an eschatological concept" (591).
## Church in the Different Dispensations

<mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Allison, Gregg. Sojourners and Strangers: The Doctrine of the Church. Wheaton, IL: Crossway: 2012.</mark>

The church can be broken down into the following dispensations:

1. The patriarchal period.
2. The mosaic period
3. The New Testament period

"The New Testament Church is essentially one with the Church of the old dispensation. As far as their essential nature is concerned, they both consist of true believers, and of true believers only. And in their external organization, both represent a mixture of good and evil" (83).

"The key differences between the Jewish people and the church include the permanent indwelling of Christians by the Holy Spirit, the baptism of the Holy Spirit for Christians, earthly promises to Israel versus heavenly promises to the church, law as the rule of life for the jews versus grace for Christians, and incorporation into the body of Christ for Christians" (87).

## The Attributes of the Church

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Allison, Gregg. Sojourners and Strangers: The Doctrine of the Church. Wheaton, IL: Crossway: 2012.</mark>

"This universal church becomes manifested in local churches characterized by being doxological, logocentric, pneumadynamic, covenantal, confessional, missional, and spatio-temporal/eschatological" (29).

The first three characters are regarding the origin and orientation of the church, it is (1) doxological, or oriented to he glory of God; (2) logocentric, or centered on the incarnate Word of God, Jesus Christ, and the inspired Word of God. Scripture; and (3) pneumatodynamic, or created, gathered, gifted, and empowered by the Holy Spirit. The final four are characteristic regarding the gathering and sending of the church; it is (4) covenantal, or gathered as members in new covenant relationship with God and in covenantal relationship with each other; (4) confessional, or united by both personal confession of faith in Christ and common confession of Christina faith; (6) missional, or identified as the body of divinely called and divinely sent ministers to proclaim the gospel and advanced the kingdom of God and (7) spatio-temnporal/eschatological, or assembled at a historical reality" (31-32).

"This doxological orientation characterizes all that God has created. Jesus himself explained that those whom the Holy Spirit regenerates are qualified for the doxological purpose. Those who are born again are given a new nature; their new identity is spirit" (106-07).

See #Psalm_19:1 and #Psalm_108:5 = Doxological

"The fullness of him (Christ) who fills all in all #Ephesians_1:23, a structure that is growing into a holy temple in the Lord, a dwelling place for God by the Spirit #Ephesians_2:21-22" (107).

"The church is to be centered on this inspired, sufficient, necessary, truthful, clear, authoritative, and productive Word of God" (114).

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.</mark>

"Attributes are ascribed primarily to the Church as an invisible organism, and only secondarily, to the Church as an external institution:

1. The Unity of the Church
2. The Holiness of the Church: The church is absolutely holy in an objective sense.
3. The Catholicity of the Church" (595-600).
## The Marks of the Church

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.</mark>

1. The need of such marks: "as heresies arose, it became necessary to establish certain marks by which the true Church could be recognized. The very fact of the Reformation proves that the Reformers, without denying that God maintains His church, were yet deeply conscious of the fact that an empirical embodiment of the Church may become subject to error, may depart from the truth, and may totally degenerate" (600).
2. The marks of the Church in particular:
3. The faithful preaching of the Word #John_8:31; #John_14:23; #1_John_4:1-3; #2_John_9)
4. The proper administration of the sacraments #Mark_16:15; #Acts_2:2; #1_Corinthians_11:23-30
5. The faithful exercise of discipline #Matthew_18:18; #1_Corinthians_5:1-5, #1_Corinthians_14:33; #Revelations_2:14)