## Premillennialism

Historic premillennialism holds that Christ's return comes before the millennium, but after the great tribulation. During the current church age, we can expect the world to continue to deteriorate. There will be a single return of Christ during which believers will be caught up in the air and with Chris and then come to earth with him" (DeYoung, Daily Doctrine, 2024: 366-67).

Dispensational premillennialism, like its counterpart, dispensationalism, believes that Christ will return before the millennium. However, typically in this new view, Christ returns before the great tribulation and is marked by a more literal hermeneutics. Christ will reign on the throne of David for a thousand years, during which time there will be a massive conversion of the Jews to Christ.

## Postmillennialism

This takes the thousand-year figuratively and teaches that Christ will return after the millennium. Most reformed theologians have been amillennial or postmillennial, and sometimes the difference can be hard to specify. The key distinction is that postmillennialists believe the church will prevail by the millennium, a time when the influence of evil is negligible and the world is essentially Christianized.

## Amillennialism

We are already in the thousand years, as spoken of in Revelation 20. The name amillennialism is a bit of a misnomer, because proponents accept the idea of the millennium; they believe the designation is figurative and that we are already in it. During the current church age, Satan's deception has been curtailed such that the gospel has been able to spread around the world.