## The Doctrine of the Resurrection in History

## Scriptural Proof for the Resurrection

### The Nature of the Resurrection

It is the work of the triune God. The resurrection is a work of God; in some cases, we are told that God raises the dead, with no person specified #Matthew_22:29; #2_Corinthians_1:9.

It is a physical resurrection. Paul regarded the resurrection as spiritual #2_Timothy_2:18, and many today believe only in a spiritual resurrection. However, the Bible is very explicit in teaching that the resurrection of the body in Christ is called the first fruits of the resurrection #1_Corinthians_15:20 and the firstborn of the dead #Colossians_1:18; #Revelation_1:5).

Resurrection of the unrighteousness? This would fly in the face of the doctrine of annihilationism and that of conditional immortality, both of which speak to what happens to the resurrection of the ungodly.  The Scripture does teach that the wicked are resurrected #Daniel_12:2; #John_5:28; #Acts_24:15; #Revelation_20:13-15.

### The Time of the Resurrection

This is all based on the [[20.02 Millennial Views|Millennial Views]].

## The Final Judgment

### The Doctrine of the Last Judgment in History

### The Nature of the Final Judgment

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.</mark>

"The final judgment may not be regarded as a spiritual, invisible, and endless process, which is identical with God's providence in history. The Bible clearly teaches us that God, even in the present life, visits evil with punishment and regards the good with blessings. These punishments and rewards are in some cases positive, but in other instances appear as the natural providential results of the evil committed or the good done #Deuteronomy_9:54; #Psalm_9:16; #Psalm_37:28; #Psalm_59:13; #Proverbs_11:5; #Proverbs_14:11; #Isaiah_32:16; #Lamentations_5:7)" (764).

"Scripture contains clear indications of at least two parties that will be judged. It is quite evident that those who gnats have afflicted will stand before the tribunal of God #Matthew_8:29; #1_Corinthians_6:3; #2_Peter_2:4; #Jude_6. Satan's hellish deism will meet hate-filled doom on the day of judgment. It is also clear that every individual foot of the Huan race will have to appear before the judgment seat #Ecclesiastics_12:14; #Psalm_50:4-6; #Matthew_12:36; #Matthew_25:32; #Romans_14:10; #2_Corinthians_5:10; #Revelation_20:12)" (767).

### The Time of the Judgment