## The Final State of the Wicked

- Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.

"In present theology, there is an evident trend in some circles to rule out the idea of eternal punishment. The Annihilationists, who are still represented in such as Adventism and Millennial Darwinism, and advocates of conditional immortality, deny the continued existence of the wicked, and thereby render that eternal punishment unnecessary. However, the Bible teaches that the continued existence of the wicked is a reality #Matthew_24:5; #Matthew_25:30; #Luke_16:19-31. Moreover, the subject of hell, the Bible certainly uses local terms right along. It is called the eternality of torment, where wicked idolators sacrificed their children, causing them to pass through he fire" (771).

"The Bible also speaks of the furnace of fire #Matthew_13:42 and of the lake of fire (Revelation 20:14), which forms a contrast with the sea of glass like unto crystal (Revelation 4:6).

## The Final State of the Righteous

The new creation -- "the final state of believers will be preceded by the passing of the present world and the appearance of a new creation. The regeneration. The restoration (773).

"The reward of the righteous is described as eternal life, that is, not merely an endless life, but life in all its fulness, without any of the imperfections and disturbances of the present #Matthew_25:46; #Romans_2:7. The fulness of this life is enjoyed in communion with—God, which is really the essence of eternal life #Revelation_21:3" ( 773).