 ## Presumptive and Promissory Regeneration

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">DeMarest, Bruce. *The Cross and Salvation: The Doctrine of Salvation*. Crossway, Wheaton, IL: 1997</mark>

Covenant theologians, with other evangelicals, define regeneration as that radical change of nature from spiritual death to spiritual life wrought in us by Christ through the power of the Spirit. The new birth is the impartation by the triune God of a new heart. Regeneration is not a cooperative work between God and sinners (syngergism), rather, salvation is God's work from beginning to end (monergism)" (285).

Presumptive regeneration --> asserts that infants of believing parents are baptized not to become regenerated but because, in some important sense, they already possess the seeds of faith and regeneration. 

Promissory regeneration --> according to which baptism is judged a visible sign of God's covenant promise of new life to believing adults and their children (286). 

Begun in baptism, regeneration does not take place in one moment, one day, or one year. Rather, it is accomplished through continual, sometimes even slow, advances (286). 

Old Testament circumcision and New Testament Baptism are related. Calvin insisted that infants are not capable of faith and repentance, but as members of the covenant family, they are able to receive the seed of regeneration and [[15.05 Sanctification | sanctification]] (286).

The purpose of infant baptism is to testify that they are heirs of the blessing promised to the seed of the faithful and that after they grow up, they may acknowledge the fact of their Baptism, and receive and produce its fruit. Calvin, baptism is like a sealed document to confirm to us that all our sins are so abolished, remitted, and effaced that they can never come to his sight, be recalled or charged against us (286).

God's word states that the unregenerate are morally evil, #Genesis_8:21, #Matthew_7:11, #Matthew_12:43, #John_3:19, and need to be made pure and clean (292).

Moreover, the unsaved are spiritually sick and need to be made spiritually healthy, #Matthew_9:12. 

Christians live in spiritual darkness, #Matthew_4:16, #John_3:19, #Ephesians_5:8, and need to be made light in the Lord, #2_Corinthians_4:6, #Ephesians_5:8. Unbelievers, furthermore, are slaves to sin, #John_8:34, #Romans_6:6, #2_Timothy_2:26, and mst be liberated to becoem free mena dn women, #John_8:32, #Romans_6:18; #Hebrews_2:15. Finally the unsaved are the sentence of physical, #Romans_5:12, #Romans_8:10, spiritual, #Ephesians_5:14, and eternal, #Romans_6:23, #2_Thessalonians_1:9, death and need to receive eternal life, #John_3:15-16; #Romans_6:23 (292).

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Murray, John. *Redemption Accomplished and Applied*. William B. Eerdmans Publishing Company, Grand Rapids: MA, 1955.</mark>

God effects a radical, all-pervasive change. This change cannot be explained in terms of any combination, permutation, or accumulation of human resources, a change which is nothing less than a new creation by him who calls the things that be not as though they were, who spake. It was done, who commanded, and it stood fast. This, in a word, is regeneration (100).

We are passive in regeneration (104).

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Saint Augustine. *City of God*. Translated by Henry Bettenson. London, England: Penguin Books, 2003. </mark>

Virtus and vices are not the same thing, even if they undergo the same torment (14).Devotion combined with self-sufficiency yields great profit. For we brought nothing into this world, and now we cannot take anything away with us. So, if we have food and clothes, we are content. For those who wish to fall into temptation and into a snare, and into many foolish and harmful desires, which plunge me into death and destruction. For acquisitiveness is the root of all evils, those who have this as their aim have strayed away from the path and have entangled themselves in many sorrows. (17).