## Scriptural Terms for Sanctification and Holiness

- Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.

Sanctification "is used in a mental sense of persons or things #Matthew_6:9; #Luke_11:2; #1_Peter_3:15). In such cases, it means to regard an object as holy, to ascribe holiness to it, or to acknowledge its holiness by word or deed. It is also employed occasionally in a ritual sense, that is, in the sense of separating from ordinary for sacred purposes or of setting aside for a certain office" (548-49).

- Hoekema, Anthony. Created in God's Image. Cambridge, UK: Wm B. Eerdmans Publishing Company: 1986.

"cultivate the salvation of God" (9).

"take an active part in the advancement of their sanctification" (9).

### The Biblical Idea of Holiness and Sanctification

- Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.

"In Scripture, the quality of holiness applies first of all to God, and as it applies to Him, its fundamental idea is that of unapproachableness. And this unapproachableness is based on the fact that God is divine and therefore absolutely distinct from the creature. Holiness in this sense is not merely an attribute to be coordinated with others in God. IT is rather predictable of everything that is found in God" (552).

"The sinner becomes aware of his impurity as over against the majesty purity of God (Isaiah 6). Thus the idea of holiness as majesty purity or ethical sublimity was developed" (552).

"In the New Testament, holiness is seldom ascribed to God. In all probability, the explanation for this lies in the fact that in the NT holiness stands forth as the special characteristics of the Spirit of God, by whom believers are sanctified, are qualified, for service, and are led to their eternal destiny #2_Thessalonians_2:13; #Titus_3:5)" (553).

#### The Nature of Sanctification

- Bavinck, Herman. Reformed Dogmatics: Abridged in One Volume. Grand Rapids, MI: Baker Academic, 2011.

"Sanctification is also a call to active, continued repentance on the part of the Christian. Sanctification is both a gift and a task. We are to die to sin and present our members as instruments of righteousness and give ourselves wholly to God #Romans_12:1; #2_Corinthians_7:1; #_Thessalonians_4:3; #Hebrews_12:14)" (579).

- Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.

"It is supernational. It is essentially a work of God, though insofar as He employs means, man can and is expected to co-operate by the proper use of these means. Scripture clearly exhibits the supernatural character of sanctification in several ways #1_Thessalonians_5:23; #Hebrews_13:20)" (554).

There are two parts of sanctification:

1. The mortification of the older man, the body of sin.
2. The quickening of the new man, created in Christ Jesus

"Sanctification takes place in the inner life of man, in the heart, and this cannot be changed without changing the whole organism of man" (555)
#### The Characteristics of Sanctification

- Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.

"Sanctification is a work of which God and not man is the author. Only the advocates of the so-called free will can claim that it is a work of man" (555).

Sanctification takes place partly in the subconscious life, and as such is an immediate operation of the Holy Spirit, but also partly in the conscious life, and then depends on the use of specific means, such as the constant exercise of faith, the study of God's Word, prayer, and association with other believers.

Sanctification is a lengthy process and never reaches perfection in this life.

The sanctification of the believer must be completed either at the very moment of death, or immediately after death, as fast as the soul is concerned, and at the resurrection insofar as it pertains to the body. This would seem to follow from the fact that, on the one hand, the Bible teaches that in the present life no one can claim freedom from sin #2_Kings_8:46; #Proverbs_20:9; #Romans_3:10; #James_3:2; #1_John_1:8 and on the other hand, those who have gone before are entirely sanctified. (556).

- Hoekema, Anthony. Created in God's Image. Cambridge, UK: Wm B. Eerdmans Publishing Company: 1986.

"Sanctification is that work of God by which the Holy Spirit progressively delivers the believer from the pollution of sin and makes him or her more and more like Christ" (107).

- Owen, John. Communion with God. Banner of Truth Trust, Carlisle, PA: 2024.

"By the grace of sanctification, our natures are continually cleansed" (148).

- Owen, John. *The Holy Spirit*. Banner of Truth Trust: Puritan Paperback, Carlisle, PA: 1998.

"Sanctification is a fruit of that peace with God which he had made and prepared for us by Jesus Christ. God was in Christ reconciling the world to himself, #2_Corinthians_5:19" (113).

"Believers are often ignorant of true holiness. They do not fully understand its true nature, its origin, or the fruits it produces. It may seem strange that though all believers are made holy they should not understand what is wrought in them and what abides in them" (115).
## The Doctrine of Sanctification in History

- Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.

"The Reformation, in speaking of sanctification, emphasized the antithesis of sin and redemption rather than that of nature and supernature. They made a clear distinction between justification and sanctification, regarding the former as a legal act of divine grace, affecting the judicial status of man, and the latter, as a moral or re-creative work, changing the inner nature of man" (551)

By exalting sanctification over justification, we are attempting to avoid the dangers of self-righteousness.