## Scriptural Terms for Faith

- Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.

"The Old Testament contains no noun for faith. Faithfulness #Deuteronomy_32:4; #Psalm_ 36:5; #Psalm_37:3 but the way in which the statement of Habakkuk is applied in the New Testament #Romans_1:17; #Galatians_3:11; #Hebrews_10:38, would seem to indicate that he prophet used the term in the sense of faith. The common Old Testament word for "to believe" is he'emin, the hipil form of 'aman. The work is construed with the proposition eth and lamedh, which refers to confidence" (511).

Faith (pistis) has two meanings: (a) a conviction based on confidence in a person and in his testimony, which, as such, is distinguished from knowledge resting on personal investigations, and (b) the confidence itself on which such a conviction rests. This is more than a mere intellectual conviction that a person is reliable; it presupposes a personal relation to the object of confidence, a going out of one's self, to rest in another" (512).

- DeMarest, Bruce. *The Cross and Salvation: The Doctrine of Salvation*. Crossway, Wheaton, IL: 1997.

Faith, whatever exists, is in every case, without exception, the gift of God and the work of the Holy Spirit. Repentance signifies the sinner's determination to turn from all known sin (249).

Faith connotes the sinner's determination to turn to Christ (249). 

By spiritual conversion, we mean a person's decisive turning from sin, self, and Satan unto God through Jesus Christ and the power of the Spirit (249).

A prime example of biblical conversion is the parable of the lost son, #Luke_15:11-12 (250).

### Figurative Expressions Used to Describe the Activity of Faith

There are several figurative expressions of faith in Scripture.

1. It is spoken of as looking to Jesus, #John_3:14-15. This is a very appropriate figure, as it encompasses the various elements of faith, particularly a steadfast gaze directed at someone, as the passage indicates.
2. It is also represented as a hungering and thirsting, an eating and drinking #Matthew_5:6; #John_6:50-58. When men really hunger and thirst spiritually, they feel that something is wanting, are conscious of the indispensable character of that which is lacking, and endeavor to obtain it
3. There are also the figures of coming to Christ and receiving him #John_5:40; #John_7:37; #John_6:44. The figure of coming to Christ pictures faith as an action in which man looks away from himself and his own merits, to be clothed with the righteousness of Jesus Christ.

## The Doctrine of Faith in History

- Bavinck, Herman. Reformed Dogmatics: Abridged in One Volume. Grand Rapids, MI: Baker Academic, 2011.

"The call to faith must be universally preached; this is Christ's command #Matthew_28:19 and the Bible tells us that many who do not come are nevertheless called #Matthew_22:14; #Luke_14:16-18. The outcome must be left in God's hands; we are to obey" (505).

- Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.

From the beginning, faith stood out in the minds of the leaders as the one excellent condition of salvation.

"There is no current definition of faith. While there was a tendency to use the word faith to denote the acceptance of the truth on testimony, it was also in some cases employed in a deeper sense, to include the idea of self-surrender to the truth intellectually received" (514).

"Faith is perfect in love and thus becomes the principle of good works" (514).

### The Idea of Faith in Scripture

- Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.

"Evidently, the New Testament writers, in stressing faith as the fundamental principle of the religious life, were not conscious of shifting ground and of departing from the Old Testament representation. They regard Abraham as the type of all true believers #Romans_4; #Galatians_3; #Hebrews_11; #James_2, and those who are of faith as the true sons of Abraham #Romans_2:28; #Romans_4:12; #Galatians_3:9) Faith is never treated as a novelty of the new covenant, nor is any distinction drawn between the faith of the two covenants" (516).

"The promise of God is in the foreground, and the case of Abraham is designed to set forth the idea that the proper response to it is that of faith" (517).

"Even in the period of the law, faith is distinctly soteriological, looking to the Messianic salvation. It is a trusting in the God of salvation and a firm reliance on His promises for the future" (517).

"The demand for faith in Jesus as the Redeemer, promised and hoped for, appeared as something characteristic of the new age. To believe meant to become a Christian. This demand seemed to create a gulf between the old dispensation and the new. The beginning of the latter is even called the coming to faith. The Gospel of John stresses the higher aspects of this faith more than the Synoptics" (517-18).

### Faith in General

- Bavinck, Herman. Reformed Dogmatics: Abridged in One Volume. Grand Rapids, MI: Baker Academic, 2011.

"Our Lord's command settles the matter; we must proclaim the gospel, along with the command to repent and believe to all people promiscuously and indiscriminately" (505).

"God never releases his grip on us and never abandons his claims on us, on our service, and on our complete consecration" (505).

"God who is the creator, sustainer, and ruler of all things also orders the lives of those on whom he will, in his time, bestow the gift of faith, and in many different ways prepares for his gracious work in human hearts" (506).

"Faith is trust-filled surrender to God and his word of promise" (526).

- Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.

"There is a certainty which man obtains by means of perception, experience, and logical deduction, but there is also an intuitive certainty. In every science, some axioms cannot be demonstrated, and intuitive convictions that are not acquired by perception or logical deduction. The sphere of immediate certainty is greater than that of demonstrative certainty" (519).

Faith = a conviction that the testimony of another is accurate and that what he promises will be done.

Mongeristics --by the one working

Synergistics - by a work of cooperation.

- DeYoung, Kevin. Daily Doctrine. Wheaton, IL: Crossway, 2025.

"Regeneration is God's work and his alone. Being dead in our sins and trespasses, we are passive, helpless, acted upon in the new birth, rather than working jointly with God" (245).

"Faith is the assurance of things hoped for, the conviction of things not seen (Hebrews 11:1).

- Hoekema, Anthony. Created in God's Image. Cambridge, UK: Wm B. Eerdmans Publishing Company: 1986.

"After a person made such a choice, he or she must continue to live in fellowship with God and in the obedience of faith. The fact that we can live in this way only through God's strength does not take away our responsibility to live such a life" (8).

"Since man is a creature, God must regenerate him--give him new spiritual life. Since man is also a person, however, he or she must also believe--that is, in response to the gospel, he or she must make a conscious, personal choice to accept Christ and follow him. God must regenerate and man must believe: these two must always be kept together" (8).

- Sproul, RC. Truths We Confess: A Systematic Exposition of the Westminster Confession of Faith. Orlando, FL: Reformation Trust, 2019.

"Faith is not something that comes from our flesh, nor is it something that is evoked by our decisions. Faith is a gift of God. It is worked in the soul by the Holy Spirit. It is the gift of Jesus, who is its author" (331).
## Saving Faith

- Bavinck, Herman. Reformed Dogmatics: Abridged in One Volume. Grand Rapids, MI: Baker Academic, 2011.

"The covenant of grace carries with it the obligation to walk in the way of the covenant; the covenant of grace does not depend on the obedience of human beings. It depends solely on God's faithfulness" (585).

- Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.

"True saving faith is a faith that has its seat in the heart and is rooted in the regenerate life. A distinction is often made between the habitus and the actus of faith. Back of both of these, however, lies the semen idei. This faith is not the first of all an activity of man, but a potential wrought by God in the heart of the sinner. The seed of faith is implanted in man in regeneration" (521).

#"Saving faith can be defined as a certain conviction, wrought in the heart by the Holy Spirit, as to the truth of the gospel, and a hearty reliance on the promises of God in Christ" (522).

- DeYoung, Kevin. Daily Doctrine. Wheaton, IL: Crossway, 2025.

- Historical faith: intellectual apprehension of the truth, devoid of any moral or spiritual purpose.

- "Historical faith involves mental assent to many of the facts about God. King Agrippa may not have been converted, but he believed the prophets #Acts_26:27-28" (249).

- Miraculous faith: persuasion wrought in the mind of a person that a miracle will be performed by him or on his behalf.

- Faith in miracles can be taken in a passive sense or in an active mind. This type of faith may or may not be accompanied by saving faith. Crowds often marveled at the signs and wonders Jesus performed, but they did not follow him as disciples.

- Temporal faith: this is the persuasion of the truth of religion, which is accompanied by some prompting of the conscience and a stirring of the affections, but is not rooted in a regenerate heart.

- Short-lived, springing up for a time before withering away or being choked out #Mark_4:16-19" (249).

"Saving faith is worked in us by God's grace. While we must exercise faith as an act of the will, faith is a gift of God, not in the sense that God offers it for people to choose, but that it is, in actual fact, bestowed on them, breathed and infused into them. Faith is not the gift of healing antidote we can take if we are smart enough to take it. Faith is like a blood transfusion poured into our veins when we were utterly helpless to help ourselves. Faith is not something outside of us that we grab hold of. It is a work that God works in us, producing both the will to believe and the belief itself" (243).

- Sproul, RC. Truths We Confess: A Systematic Exposition of the Westminster Confession of Faith. Orlando, FL: Reformation Trust, 2019.

"Faith is described in terms of grace. The connection between faith and grace is a repeated theme in the New Testament, particularly in the writing of the Apostle Paul" (316).

"We have been regenerated by the Holy Spirit and by the grace of God, and saving faith has been imparted to our souls" (323).

## Faith and Assurance

- DeYoung, Kevin. Daily Doctrine. Wheaton, IL: Crossway, 2025.

"Faith is a firm and certain knowledge of God's benevolence toward us. True faith is not only a knowledge and conviction that God's words are true; it is also a deep-rooted assurance that I too have my sins forgiven and have been made forever right with God, and have been granted salvation" (252.

"Assurance is a gift available to every true believer. Assurance is both an exhortation and a comfort of the Christian. We ought to strive for good works and a good conscience, always remembering that even endeavoring and pursuing are signs of God's grace in us" (252).

## Faith and Repentance

- DeMarest, Bruce. *The Cross and Salvation: The Doctrine of Salvation*. Crossway, Wheaton, IL: 1997.

Repentance is a change of mind, ultimate loyalty, and behavior whereby pre-Christians turn from sin unto God (252).

Scripture suggests that the intiative in conversion and repentance lies with God himself. The psalmist's desire was that God's people woul turn to him rather than return to folly, #Psalm_85:8 (255).

- Murray, John. *Redemption Accomplished and Applied*. William B. Eerdmans Publishing Company, Grand Rapids: MA, 1955.

[[15.06 Regeneration | Regeneration]] is inseperable from its effects and one of the effects if fiath. Without regeneration it is morally and spiritually impossible for a person to believe in Christ, but when a person is regenerated it is morally a spiritually impossible for that person not to believe (111).

Regeneration is the act of God and of God alone. But fiath is not the act of God; it is not God who believes in Christ for salvation, it is the sinner (111).


- Parsons, Burke, editor. Table Talk Magazine: Bondage of the Will. Sanford, FL: Ligonier Ministries, October 2025.

"We cannot separate faith and repentance; we must distinguish them and not confuse them. Saving faith receives Jesus and results in Him alone, and thus it is the way by which we take hold of salvation. Repentance is necessary, but it is not how we receive Christ. Really, we should consider it as a fruit of faith, since one cannot truly repent unless one first believes that God will save repentant people who believe in Jesus" (30).

