Justification means to declare judicially that one's state is in harmony with the demands of the law #Exodus_23:7; #Deuteronomy_25:1; #Proverbs_17:15; #Isaiah_5:23.

Justification = to declare a person to be just. A person's declaration that one's moral character conforms with the law #Matthew_12:37; #Luke_7:29; #Romans_3:4.

- Ferguson, Sinclair. The Holy Spirit: Contours of Christian Theology. Downers Grove, IL: InterVarsity Press, 1996.

Nature of justification = imputed, not infused, alien, not self-attained, righteousness (96).

- Hoekema, Anthony. Created in God's Image. Cambridge, UK: Wm B. Eerdmans Publishing Company: 1986.

"Justification is that act of God by which he imputes to the believer the perfect satisfaction and righteousness of Christ" (107).

- Owen, John. Communion with God. Banner of Truth Trust, Carlisle, PA: 2024.

"There are two reasons why man cannot work out for himself a righteousness by perfectly obeying the law. He has already sinned, and the wages of sin are death #Romans_3:23. And even if all former debts should be blotted out, yet man is still unable to fulfill the law. By the works of the law, no flesh shall be justified. Man's flesh, weakened by sin, cannot walk in perfect obedience to the law" (108).

"Self-righteous man is thus brought to see himself in two ways: 1. He sees himself as a sinner condemned by God's law. 2. He sees himself as a creature bound to obey God's holy law" (108) perfectly.

## The Doctrine of Justification in History

- Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.

"The doctrine of justification by faith was not always clearly understood. In fact, it did not find its classical expression until the days of the Reformation" (532).

## The Nature and Characteristics of Justification

- Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.

"Justification is a judicial act of God, in which He declares, based on the righteousness of Jesus Christ, that all the claims of the law are satisfied with respect to the sinner" (533).

1. Justification removes the guilt of sin and restores the sinner to all filial rights involved in his state as a child of God, including an eternal inheritance. Sanctification eliminates the pollution of sin and renews the sinner ever-increasingly in conformity with the image of God.
2. Justification takes place outside of the sinner in the tribunal of God, and does not change his inner life, though the sentence is brought home to him subjectively. Sanctification takes place in the inner life of man and gradually affects his whole being.
3. Justification takes place once and for all. It is not repeated, nor is it a process; it is complete at once and for all.
4. While the meritorious cause of both lies in the merits of Christ, there is a difference in the efficient cause.

### The Elements of Justification

- Bavinck, Herman. Reformed Dogmatics: Abridged in One Volume. Grand Rapids, MI: Baker Academic, 2011.

"Justification is the doctrine on which the church stands or falls. Either we must do something to be saved, or our salvation is purely a gift of grace" (563).

- Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.

There are two ways of looking at justification: the negative element and the positive element.

1. The negative element is that justification, namely, the remission of sins on the ground of the atoning work of Jesus Christ, is based particularly on the passive obedience of the Savior. This is partly due to Old Testament representation, which, on this side of justification, is decidedly in the foreground #Psalm_32:1; #Isaiah_43:25; #Isaiah_44:22; #Jeremiah_31:34). The forgiveness of sins is an important element in justification, which is evident, not only from the Old but also the New Testament" (534).
2. The positive element, which the Arminian does not hold, is focused more on the active obedience of Christ. According to Acts 26:18, we obtain by faith and inheritance among them that are sanctified. Therefore, believers are adopted as children, which is a legal act, whereby God places the sinner in the status of a child, but does not change him inwardly any more than partners by the mere act of adoption change the inner life of an adopted child. The change that is effected concerns the relation in which man stands to God. They also have the right to eternal life.

- DeYoung, Kevin. Daily Doctrine. Wheaton, IL: Crossway, 2025.

"Justification is an act of God's free grace, wherein he pardons all our sins, and accepts us as righteous in his sight, only for the righteousness of Christ imputed to us, and received by faith alone. That word imputed is essential to a biblical understanding of justification. The controversy between the Reformers and Rome was whether the righteousness whereby we are forgiven and made right with God is a righteousness working in us or a righteousness reckoned to our account" (254).

"Imputation is essential to the storyline of Scripture. Adam's disobedience was imputed, our sin was imputed to Christ, and Christ's obedience is imputed to the elect" (255).
### The Sphere in Which Justification Occurs

It is customary to distinguish between an active and a passive, as well as an objective and a subjective sphere.

1. Active or Objective Justification is "justification in the most fundamental sense of the world. It is fundamental to what is called subjective justification, which consists of a declaration that God makes regarding the sinner, and this declaration is made in the tribunal of God. "This declaration is not a declaration in which God simply acquires the sinner, without taking any account of the claims of justice, but is rather a divine declaration that, in the case of the sinner under consideration, the means of the law are met. The sinner is declared righteous in view of the fact that the righteousness of Christ is imputed to him" (Berkhof, Systematic Theology, 2019: 537). Active justification logically precedes passive justification.
2. Passive or Subjective justification takes place in the heart of the conscience of the sinner. A purely objective justification that is not brought home to the sinner would not answer the purpose. The granting of a pardon would mean nothing to a prisoner unless the law tidings were communicated to him and the doors of the prison were opened. When the Bible speaks of justification, it usually refers to passive justification. Born in the mind that two cannot be separated.

"The active justification is then said to have taken place in eternity or in the resurrection of Christ, while passive justification takes place by faith, and therefore it follows the other in a temporal sense.

## The Ground of Justification

1. Justification from eternity.

2. Scriptures speak of the grace or mercy of God, which is from everlasting #Psalm_25:5; #Psalm_103:17.
3. In the pactum salutis, the guilt of the sins of the elect was transferred to Christ, and the righteousness of Christ is imputed to them.
4. The sinner receives the initial grace of regeneration based on the imputed righteousness of Christ
5. Justification is an [immanent](onenote:..\II.%20Theology%20Proper\5%20The%20Properties%20of%20God.one#5.01%20The%20Properties%20\(or%20Attributes\)%20of%20God&section-id={DEF58F85-167D-694E-ACA4-771A4561A9B2}&page-id={63A253D2-E038-3D42-BDB0-6F03651B4629}&end&base-path=https://d.docs.live.net/fc52dea27c35b98d/Documents/Reformed%20Dogmatics) act of God, and as such must be from eternity.

6. Justification in the resurrection of Christ.

 Bavinck, Herman. Reformed Dogmatics: Abridged in One Volume. Grand Rapids, MI: Baker Academic, 2011.

"Justification is not an ethical but a forensic act. In the Old Testament the word does not yet serve to express the forgiveness of sins as is indicated by the following words: to deliver #Psalm_39:8; to impute #Psalms_32:2, to forget and not remember (Isaiah 43:25; Jeremiah 31:34), to cast behind one's back #Isaiah_38:17, to blot out #Psalm_51:1; #Isaiah_43:25 to forgive #Exodus_34:9; #Psalm_32:1)" (563).

"God's plan of redemption included sanctification and glorification. Israel was called to be a holy people #Genesis_17:7; #Exodus_19:6; #Leviticus_11:44; #Leviticus_19:2; #Leviticus_20:7); purity of heart and act was the goal. When Israel failed to meet this requirement of the covenant and was deserving of judgment, the prophets announced that God would not break his covenant and forget his people but establish a new covenant in which he would forgive all their iniquities and give them new hearts #Jeremiah_31:31-34; #Ezekiel_11:19" (570).

- Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.

Justification by faith: the relation of faith in justification, see the following: #Romans_3:25, 28, 30; #Romans_5:1; #Galatians_2:16; #Philippians_3:9. "Faith is never presented as the ground of our justification. If that were the case, faith would have to be regarded as a meritorious work of man" (541).

- DeMarest, Bruce. *The Cross and Salvation: The Doctrine of Salvation*. Crossway, Wheaton, IL: 1997. 

Not on the basis of personal worth or works: is quite clear that God does not justify pre-Christians on the basis of personal character or worth. 

But on the bassi of Christ's merits: Sinners are justified on the basis of the satisfaction rendered to God's moral law through Jesus Christ (368-69). 

Because of his complete fulfillment of God's law and wholehearted dedication to his service, Jesus is the Holy Righteous One, #Acts_3:14, #Acts_7:52, #Acts_22:14; #1_John_2:1 (369).

The righteousness of God! The righteousness of which Paul spoke has it sorigin in God, satifies the dmenad of divine justice, and accomplishes the justification of the unrighteous (370).