By a special operation of the Holy Spirit, conversion may be a sharply marked crisis in the life of the individual, but may also come in the form of a gradual process.

- Bavinck, Herman. Reformed Dogmatics: Abridged in One Volume. Grand Rapids, MI: Baker Academic, 2011.

"The triune God produces all things in creation and new creation by his Word and Spirit #Genesis_1; #Psalm_33:6; #John_1:3; #Hebrews_1:3; #Hebrews_11:3 all things speak to us of God. God's external call as law comes to all people in nature, in history, and in a variety of experiences" (504).

- DeMarest, Bruce. *The Cross and Salvation: The Doctrine of Salvation*. Crossway, Wheaton, IL: 1997.

Rather than a moment of decisive turning, repentenace is seen as a lifelong process of growth and maturyt. One strand of liberalism defines faith as a person's felt sense of dependence on God (237).

Ritschl said that the heart of this theology was value-judgements made in respect of Christ's work in the interests of our own blessedness (237).

The spirituality dead can no more converts themelves than the physically dead can restore themselves. Althought repentenace and faith are gifts from above, God commands people everywhere to exerts themselves in conversion. Conversion may occur in an instant or as a lengthy process (249).

All the fruits meet for repentence are contained in fiath itself. You shall never find that man who trusts Christ remains an enemy to God, or a lover of sin. Faith involes knowledge of the Gospel

- DeYoung, Kevin. Daily Doctrine. Wheaton, IL: Crossway, 2025.

"Conversion involves turning from sin and turning to God. This is another way of saying that conversion entails repentance and faith. Repentance entails sorrow for sin and the forsaking of sin #2_Corinthians_7:10-11, but it is not groveling before a stingy God, or a meritorious work that convinces God to forgive us. Repentance unto life is a saving grace whereby a sinner not only has a sense of his sin, but he also has a sense of mercy of God in Christ" (247-48).

Repentance is twofold, between repentance as turning to Christ in an act of saving faith, and repentance in the ongoing life of Christian discipleship.

- Ferguson, Sinclair. The Holy Spirit: Contours of Christian Theology. Downers Grove, IL: InterVarsity Press, 1996.

 "There is a close relationship between the promise of #John_16:8-11 and the events described in #Acts_2:22-24. There, in Peter's first sermon, he bore witness to the exaltation of Christ, the truth of which, by the Spirit's work in the hearer's hearts, convict them of their sin; and of Christ's righteousness and judgement, since resurrection from the dead, seen as the condemnation of the Prince of darkness and death and the harbinger of the Day of the Lord and final judgement, had taken place in him. Peter sees the coming of the Spirit not only as the fulfillment of Joel's prophecy but also as the fulfillment of #Psalm_16:80 and #Psalm_110:1, which anticipates the exaltation of the Lord and the ensuing period in which his enemies would be subdued before him (69).

## The Scriptural Terms for Conversion

- Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.

In the Old Testament, the following is used for the term conversion: "nacham, which serves to express a deep feeling, either of sorrow or of relief. It means to repent, and this is often accompanied by a change of plan and of action. Shubh is also used, which is the most common word for conversion, meaning to turn, to turn about, and to return. It is often used in a literal sense of both God and man, but soon acquired a religious and ethical significance" (497).

In the New Testament, the following are used: "metanoia, which is the most common word for conversion in the New Testament, and is also the most fundamental of the terms employed. The word is composed of meta and nous, which is again connected with the verb ginosko (to know), all of which refers to the conscious life of man" (497).

## The Definition

- Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.

"In the case of Moses, Joshua, and the Judges, the people of Israel repeatedly turned their backs upon Jehovah, and after experiencing the displeasure of God, repented of their and returned unto the Lord: there was a national conversion in the kingdom of Judah in the days of Rekiah and again in the days of Josiah. These national conversions were essentially moral reformations. They may have been accompanied with some real religious conversions of individuals" (500).

"The Bible also refers to a conversion of individuals that represent no change of heart, and are therefore of only passing significance. Jesus speaks of those who hear the word and at once receive it with joy, but have no root in themselves, and therefore endure but for a while" (500).

 "True conversion is the born of godly sorrow, and issues in a life of devotion to God #2_Corinthians_7:10). It is a change that is rooted in the work of regeneration, and that is effected in the conscious life of the sinner by the Spirit of God; a change of thoughts and opinions, of desires and volitions, which involves the conviction that the former direction of life was unwise and wrong and alters the entire course of life" (500).

"The Bible also speaks of a repeated conversion, in which a converted person, after a temporary lapse into the ways of sin, turns back to God. Scriptures use the word conversion for such cases #Luke_22:32; #Revelations_2:5" (501).

## The Characteristics of Conversion

- Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.

"Conversion is simply one part of the saving process" (501).

- Conversion belongs to the re-creative rather than to the judicial acts of God.
- As the word metanoi clearly indicates, conversion takes place not in the subconscious, but in the conscious life of the sinner. This does not mean that it is not rooted in the subconscious life. Being a direct effect on regeneration, it naturally includes a transition in the operations of the new life from the subconscious to the conscious life.
- Conversion makes the conscious beginning, not only of the putting away of the old man, a fleeing from sin, but also of the putting on of the new man, striving for holiness in life.
- Conversion denotes a momentary change and not a process like sanctification.
- It may also be a gradual change.

- DeYoung, Kevin. Daily Doctrine. Wheaton, IL: Crossway, 2025.

"Turrentin distinguishes between two kinds of conversion. The first kind is passive, the infusion of supernatural habit by the Holy Spirit. We now call this regeneration. The second kind is active and involves exercising these new habits. We now call this conversion" (246).

Throughout Scripture, a pattern of regeneration is evident, particularly in the book of Acts. When this happens two things appear to occur after each of these cycles:

1. Regeneration by the Spirit (conversion-initiation)
2. Baptism with the Spirit

## The Necessity of Conversion

- Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.

"The Bible speaks in absolute terms of the necessity of regeneration, not so of the necessity of conversion. Those who identify the two cannot ignore this distinction. Undoubtedly, there are passages of Scripture which contain a call to conversion, in order to enjoy the blessing of God # Ezekiel_33:11; #Isaiah_55:7" (508).

See #Matthew_18:3.

"The question as to the necessity of conversion should be answered with discrimination. Those who die in infancy must be regenerated, but cannot very well experience conversion, a conscious turning from sin unto God. In the case of adults, however, conversion is absolutely essential, but it need not appear in each one's life as a strongly marked crisis" (508).

- DeYoung, Kevin. Daily Doctrine. Wheaton, IL: Crossway, 2025.

"The seed of God's word may flourish for a time, only to wither away on account of suffering and persecution or to be choked by the cares of the world and deceitfulness of riches #Matthew_13:20-22. Hebrews tells us that those who have been enlightened, who have tasted the heavenly gift, have shared in the Holy Spirit, and have tasted the goodness of the word of God can away #Hebrews_6:4-6. Likewise, John indicates that some who start out among the faithful do not stay among the faithful and so provide they never really were among those who had been truly converted #1_John_2:19" (247).

-  Owen, John. *The Holy Spirit*. Banner of Truth Trust: Puritan Paperback, Carlisle, PA: 1998.

"Christ must be preached as rucified, #John_3:14; #Galatians_3:1; #Isaiah_55:1-3; #Isaiah_65:1, and seen as the only Saviour of sinners, #Matthew_1:21; #1_Thessalonians_1:10. There is a way of escape from the curse of the law, #Psalm_130:4; #Job_33:24; #Acts_4:12; #Romans_3:25; #2_Corinthians_5:21; #Galatians_3:13. God is well pleased with Christ's atonement and wants us to accept it, #2_Corinthians_5:18-20; #Isaiah_53:11; #Romans_5:20. If we belive, we shalled pardoned" (111).