## Historical Interpretations of Divine Calling

- DeMarest, Bruce. *The Cross and Salvation: The Doctrine of Salvation*. Crossway, Wheaton, IL: 1997.

	- Pelagians & Liberals

"Free will (defined as the power to choose between good and evil) is a reality in all persons, he argued, since the ability to perform what God commands is essential to being human. Pelagius flatly stated that apart from special, divine assistance, man can be without sin, and he can keep commandments of God" (205).

Prevenient grace and the universal call may be accepted or rejected. Since God restores to all the ability to respond favorably to spiritual promptings, the determining factor as to whether persons heed the Gospel call is their own free decision. H. Orton Wiley distinguished between an indirect call immediately rector on human conscience apart from the revealed Word, #Genesis_6:3, #Romans_1:19; #Romans_2:15, and a direct call applied to hearts by the inscripturated Word of God (208-09).

- The Reformers

Augustinian and Reformed theologians understand Scripture to teach that, by virtue of l sin and depravity, sinners are who Christ died for themselves are spiritually incapable of responding to the Gospel invitation, #Romans_8:7, #1_Corinthians_2:14, #Ephesians_2:1-2, #Ephesians_4:18 *211).

Sinners possess neither the will nor the ability to renounce self and submit to Christ; hence the need for a special enablement from God (211).*
### External, Verbal Call

- DeMarest, Bruce. *The Cross and Salvation: The Doctrine of Salvation*. Crossway, Wheaton, IL: 1997.

"The single call of God to salvation may be considered from two perspectives (1) a universal call that meets with a variety of responders and a particular special call that infallibly leads to salvation" (218).

A valid Gospel offer includes a presentation of the plan of salvation, an invitation to come to Christ in repentance and faith, and the promise of certain forgiveness and redemption. We find universal invitations or general calls to turn to Yahweh and be saved given by the OT prophets (218).

Scripture teaches that the fault for a person not being saved lies not with God, but rather with the spiritual impotence and moral insolence of the person himself (219).

### Internal, Effectual Call

- DeMarest, Bruce. *The Cross and Salvation: The Doctrine of Salvation*. Crossway, Wheaton, IL: 1997.

By the internal, effectual call we mean that act of divine power, mediated through the proclaimed Word, by which the Spirit illumines darkened minds, softens stubborn wills and inclines contrary affections toward the living God, thus leading the unregenerate to trust Christ in a saving relation (221).