## The Existence of God

Theology begins and stands upon the reality of God’s being. Before speaking of His works, attributes, or saving acts, we must consider who God is in Himself. The doctrine of God's being explores the foundational truths that undergird all theological reflection: that God exists, that He has made Himself knowable, and that He has revealed His name and identity to His creatures. These are not mere abstract concepts, but truths that ground the entire structure of Christian doctrine and worship. To contemplate the being of God is to stand at the threshold of divine majesty, seeking to know the One who is both infinitely beyond us and graciously near to us.

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.</mark>

"The works of [[1.01 Theology|Theology]] or [[1.02 Systematic Theology|Systematic Theology]]" (3).

"The attempt to prove God's existence is either useless or unsuccessful. It is useless if the searcher believes that God rewards those who seek Him. And it is unsuccessful if it is an attempt to force a person who does not have this pistis using argumentation to an acknowledgment in a logical sense" (5).

"The Christian accepts the truth of the existence of God by faith. However, this faith is not blind but rather based on evidence. The primary evidence is found in Scripture, the inspired Word of God, and the secondary evidence is found in God's revelation in nature. The Bible does not prove the existence of God. It presupposes the existence of Go in its very opening statement. It describes God as the Creator of all things, the Upholder of all His creatures, and the Ruler of the destinies of individuals and nations" (5).

"Given the semelhia religiosa implanted in every man by his creation in the image of God, it is safe to assume that no one is born an atheist. Atheism results from the perverted moral state of man and from their desire to escape from God. It is deliberately blind to and suppresses the most fundamental instinct of man, the deepest needs of the soul, the highest aspiration of the human spirit, and the longings of a heart that gropes after some higher Being" (6-7).

"Anselm of Canterbury argues that man has the idea of a perfect being; that existence is an attribute of perfection; and that therefore a perfect being must exist" (10).

This is part of the ontological arguments presented by Anselm, as well as Samuel Clarke and Descartes.

For the cosmological argument, "Every existing thing in the world must have an adequate cause; and if this is so, the universe must also have an adequate cause that is a cause which is indefinitely great" (11).

For the teleological argument, "the world everywhere reveals intelligence, orders, harmony, and purpose, and thus implies the existence of an intelligent and purposeful being, adequate to the production of such a world" (11).

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Calvin, John. *Institutes of the Christian Religion.* Translated by Henry Beveridge. Hendrickson Publishers Marketing, Boston, MA: 2008</mark>

There exists in the human minds and indeed by natural instinct, some sense of deity, we hold to be beyond dispute, since God hismelf, to prevent any man from pretending ignorance, has endued all men with some idea of his Godhead, the memory of which he constantly renews and occassionally enlarges, that all to a man being aware that there is a God and that he is their Maker, may be condemned by their own conscience when they neitehr worship him nor consecrate their lives to his service (9). 

There is no nation so barbarous, no race so brutish, as not to be imbued with the conviction that there is a God (9).

Therefore, when he (man) chooses to worship wood and stone rather than be thought to have no God, it is evident how very strong this impression of a deity must be; since it is more difficult to obliterate it from the midn of man, than to break down the feelings of his nautre--these certainly being broken down, when, in opposition to his natural haughtiness, he spontaneously humbles himself before the meanest object as an act of revereance to God (9). 

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Grudem, Wayne. Systematic Theology. Grand Rapids, MI: Zondervan Academic. 2020.</mark>

"How do we know that God exists? The answer can be given in two parts. First, all people have an inner sense of God. Second, we believe that evidence that is found in Scripture and nature" (169).

"All persons everywhere have a deep, inner sense that God exists. Paul says that even gentile unbelievers knew God but did not honor him as God or give thanks to him, #Romans_1:21). Paul says that what can be known about God is plain to them and adds that this is because God has shown it to them (Rom 1:19)" (169).

"We begin to know God as our loving Father in heaven, #Romans_8:15), the Holy Spirit bears witness with our spirit that we are children of God #Romans_8:16, and we come to know Jesus Christ living within our hearts, #Ephesians_3:17; #Philippians_3:8; 10; #Colossians_1:27; #John_14:23" (169-70).

"Clear evidence of his existence is to be seen in Scripture and nature. The bible everywhere assumes that God exists. It is human beings, created in [[8.03 Imago Dei (The Image of God)|the image of God]], who must abundantly bear witness to the existence of God" (170).

"The traditional proof for the existence of God that has been constructed by Christian (and some non-Christian) philosophers at various points in history is an attempt to analyze the evidence, especially the evidence from nature, in extremely careful and logically precise ways" (171).

- Cosmological Argument
	- "Considers the fact that every known thing in the universe has a cause. Therefore, it reasons, the universe itself must also have a cause, and the cause of such a great universe can only be God" (171).

- Teleological Arguments
	- "is a subcategory of the cosmological argument. It focuses on the evidence of harmony, order, and design in the universe, and argues that its design gives evidence of an intelligent purpose" (171).

- Ontological Arguments=
	- "...begins with he idea of God, who is defined as a being greater than which nothing can be imagined. It then argues that the characteristics of existence must belong to such a being since it is greater to exist than not to exist" (172).

- Moral Arguments
	- "man's sense of right and wrong and of the need for justice to be done, and argues that there must be a God who is the source of right and wrong and who will some day mete out justice to all people" (172).

"It must be remembered that in this sinful world, God must enable us to be persuaded, or we would never believe in Him. In this fallen world, human wisdom is insufficient for knowing God. Thus Paul's preaching came in the demonstration of the Spirit and power, so that your faith might not first in the wisdom of men but in the power of God, #1_Corinthians_2:4-5)" (172-73).

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Hoekema, Anthony. Created in God's Image. Cambridge, UK: Wm B. Eerdmans Publishing Company: 1986.</mark>

"As belief in God becomes rarer, belief in man is taking its place; and so we are witnessing the rise of a new humanism" (1).

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Saint Augustine. *City of God*. Translated by Henry Bettenson. London, England: Penguin Books, 2003. </mark>

The existence of the world is a matter of observation: the existence of God is a matter of belief