
God is incomprehensible but yet knowable.
## Knowledge versus Self-Knowledge

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.</mark>

Martin Luther frequently refers to God as the Deus Absconditus (the hidden God), distinguishing Him from the Deus Revelatus (the revealed God). In some passages, he even speaks of the revealed God as still a hidden God because we cannot fully know Him even through His special revelation. To John Calvin, delving into the depths of his being is beyond comprehension. Calvin says His essence is incomprehensible; so His divinity wholly escapes all human senses. God can only acquire proper knowledge of Himself from Special Revelation and the [[2.04 The Principium Cognoscendi Internum|Principium Cognoscendi Internum]] (15).

"It is impossible for man to have knowledge of Him that is exhaustive and perfect. God cannot be subsumed under some higher genus. At the same time, it is maintained that man can obtain a knowledge of God that is perfectly adequate for realizing the divine purpose in man's life. True knowledge of God can be acquired only from the divine self-revelation, and only by the man who accepts this with childlike faith" (15).

"Even after God has revealed Himself objectively, it is not human reason that discovered God, but it is God who discloses Himself to the eye of faith" (9).

Alongside the archetypal knowledge of God, one finds God Himself; there is also an ectypal knowledge of Him, given to man by revelation.

"The Bible never operates with an abstract concept of God, but always describes Him as the Living God, who enters into various relations with His creatures, relations which are indicative of several different attributes" (27).

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Bray, Gerald. The Doctrine of God: Contours of Christian Theology. Downers Grove, IL: InterVarsity Press, 1993.</mark>

"To know God was to know his words (in [[7.03 Creation | creation]]), to hear his voice (in [[2.03 The Doctrine of Scripture|scripture]]), and to enjoy fellowship with him (in the persons of the [[6.01 The Doctrine of the Trinity in History|Trinity]])" (65).

"Augustine had argued that Scripture itself used earthly examples to instruct our minds in the things of God. Buy faith, the believer would be led from these external things to the contemplation of God himself" (66)

"Scripture did tell us something of what God was like, and that this information was important as a safeguard against false conceptions of his character which, if wrongly absorbed, might lead us astray in the practice of our Christian calling" (81).

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;"> Calvin, John. *Institutes of the Christian Religion.* Translated by Henry Beveridge. Hendrickson Publishers Marketing, Boston, MA: 2008</mark>

"Our wisdom insofar as it ought to be deemed true and solid wisdom, consists almost entirely on two parts: the knowledge of God and of ourselves" (4)

...no man can survey himself without forthwith turning his thought toward God...(4).

Thus, our feeling of ignorance, vanity, want, weakness, in short, depravity and corruption, reminds us that in the Lord, and none but he, dwell the true light of wisdom, solid virtue, exuberant goodness.  We cannot aspire to him in earnest until we have begun to be displeased with ourselves. Every person, therefore, on coming to the knowledge of himself, is not only urged to seek God, but is also led as by the hand to find him (4). 

Man never attains to a true self-knowledge until he has previously contemplated the face of God, and come down after such contemplation to look into himself (5). 

We are all naturally prone to hypocrisy; any empty semblance of righteousness is quite enough to satisfy us instead of righteousness in itself (5). 

We are deluded in estimating the powers of the mind (5). 
 
But through the knowledge of God and the knowledge of ourselves are bound together by a mutual tie, due arrangement requires that we treat of the former in the first place, and then descend to the latter (6). 

By the knowledge of God, I understand that by which we not only conceive that there is some God, but also apprehend what it is for our interest, and conducive to his glory, what, in short, it is befitting to know concerning him (7).

No man will now, in the present of the human race, perceive God to be either a father, or the author of salvation, or propitious in any respect, until Christ interpose to make our peace (7).