## The Name of God

- Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.

"The names of God constitute a difficulty for human thought. God is the Incomprehensible One, infinitely exalted above all that is temporal; but in His name He descends to all that is finite and becomes like unto man" (34).

"God Himself gives the names of God with the assurance that they contain in a measure a revelation of the Divine Being. This is made possible because the world and all its relations are and were meant to be a revelation of God" (34).

Because He has revealed Himself in creation, man can name Him after the fashion of a creature. God has to be condensed to man's level, to accommodate Himself to the limited and finite human consciousness and speak in human languages.

### The Old Testament Names and Their Meaning

Elohim is the simplest name by which God is referred to in the Old Testament. It is derived from the same root and points to God as the strong and mighty One, as the object of fear.

Adonai is related in meaning to the preceding ones. It is derived from both *dun* and 'adan, which both refer to (or mean) to judge and rule, and points to God as the almighty Ruler, to whom everything is subject, and to whom man is related as a servant.

Shaddai points to God as possessing all power in heaven and on earth. It stresses God's greatness not as an object of fear but as a source of blessing and comfort.

Yahweh - God reveals himself as the God of grace. It is always regarded as the most sacred and distinctive name of God, then incommunicable.

- Hays, Gary Edward and Mark L. Strauss, Ed. The Pentateuch: Life in the Presence of God. Brentwood, TN: B&H Academic: 2004.

"Elohim, along with closely related forms, occurs 812 times in the Pentateuch, out of 2,570 times total in the entire Hebrew Bible. It can refer to the all-powerful and true God who created the heavens and earth, #Genesis_1:1, as well as to refer to the false gods of the nations, #Exodus_22:20" (18).

Yahweh is the "name that occurs more than 1,700 times in the Pentateuch and 6,800 total in the Hebrew Bible. This term functions as God's personal name, and it carries strong connotations of God's personal, covenant relationship brought about by his close presence" (18).

Yahweh = his personal name

Elohim = God

### The New Testament Names and Their Meaning

Theos—this is the equivalent of Elohim. Theos is found in the genitive of possession, such as mou, sou, and Hemon, because in Christ, God may be regarded as the God of all and each one of His children.

Kurios—derived from Kuros*, power. This name does not carry the same connotation as Yahweh and designates God as the Mighty One, the Lord, the Possessor, and the Ruler, who has legal power and authority.