- DeYoung, Kevin. Daily Doctrine. Wheaton, IL: Crossway, 2025.

"The divine decrees are both an exercise of God's will and an expression of God's nature. God's decrees must possess the character of God himself. Here are six attributes of the decrees that mirror God's attributes" (74-74).

- Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.

1. The decrees are simple
2. The decrees are eternal
3. "The divine decree is eternal in the sense that it lies entirely in eternity. There is a real chronological order in the events of effectuation, but not in the decree respecting them" (94).
4. The decrees are immutable
5. The decrees are absolute
6. The decrees are wise
7. The word counsel, one of the terms by which the decree is designated, suggests careful deliberation and consultation. The wisdom of the counsel of the Lord can also be inferred from the fact that it stands fast forever" (94).
8. The decrees are good

*prothesis* = a purpose or counsel

"There is no series of decrees in God, but simply one comprehensive plan, embracing all that comes to pass. Our finite comprehension, however, constrains us to make distinctions, which accounts for the fact that we often speak of the decrees of God in the plural" (92).

"The decrees of God are, in turn, the foundation of His free knowledge or scientia libera.  It is the knowledge of things as they are realized throughout history. While the necessary knowledge of God logically precedes the decree, His free knowledge logically follows it. This must be maintained over against all those who believe in a conditional Predestination (such as Semi-Pelagians and Arminian) since they make the pre-determination dependent on HIs foreknowledge" (93).

"It is admitted on all hands that the decree of God is one and in all its parts equally eternal, so that it is impossible to ascribe any temporal succession to the various elements which it includes" (109).

- Grudem, Wayne. Systematic Theology. Grand Rapids, MI: Zondervan Academic. 2020.

"The decrees of God are the eternal plans of God whereby, before the creation of the world, he determined to bring about everything that happens. This includes Providence, but here we are thinking about God's decisions before the world was created rather than his providential actions in time. His providential actions are the outworking of the eternal decrees that he made long ago" (440).

- Wellum, Stephen. Systematic Theology Volume I. Brentwood, TN: B&H Academic Publishing, 2024.

"We move from the glory of God within himself, ad intra, in terms of God's attributes and triune nature to God's plan for the universe, which results in his external works, ad extra, in [[7.03 Creation|creation]], [[7.04 Providence|providence]], redemption, and consummation" (725).

"In thinking about divine action, we must distinguish between God's works within Himself, opera ad intra, works that terminate within God's beings, and God's works outside of Himself, toward His creation and creation.  From eternity, within God, there is a shared fullness of divine life and action in the Father's generation of the Son and communication between God's works within Himself, Divine the Son's processions from the Father and receiving from the Father the divine essence, and the Holy Spirit's eternal spiration from both the Father and Son, and receive from both he divine essence (John 1:1-2; 5:26; 14:26; 16:5-11)" (726-27).

"It is important to note that God's decree does not exhaust the richest of God's knowledge and wisdom. With God, all things are possible (Matthew 19:26), but not all are actualized. God has freely chosen to be the reason why the world exists and all things in God. God's decree renders his plan for all things guaranteed, although God has not planned for all things to be made effective in the same way" (728).

- Sproul, RC. Truths We Confess: A Systematic Exposition of the Westminster Confession of Faith. Orlando, FL: Reformation Trust, 2019.

"His plan of redemption is rooted and grounded in His eternal, sovereign decree" (Sproul, Truths We Confess, 2019: 76).

The divine decrees of the Lord can be broken down into [[7.02 Predestination|Predestination]], [[7.03 Creation|Creation]], and [[7.04 Providence|Providence]].