- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Bray, Gerald. The Doctrine of God: Contours of Christian Theology. Downers Grove, IL: InterVarsity Press, 1993.</mark>

"It is true to say that both the divine and the human are determined by their respective natures, an obvious point which everyone admits. Human beings might do something out of character, but they cannot go against their nature. Freedom is really conceivable only in personal terms, and it's at that level both free will and predestination operate" (91)

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">DeMarest, Bruce. *The Cross and Salvation: The Doctrine of Salvation*. Crossway, Wheaton, IL: 1997.</mark>

Predestination does not destroy free will, human effort, or prayer, for God has chosen to accomplish his purpose by these secondary causes (116).

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">DeYoung, Kevin. Daily Doctrine. Wheaton, IL: Crossway, 2025.</mark>

The will of God can be used to describe God's will of decree. This refers to what God has ordained, what He has planned from all eternity according to His sovereign purposes. The Bible also speaks of the will of God as something human beings can obey or disobey" (75).

"Our sin, which the fallen will choose by necessity, is also voluntary because the choice is owing to our corruption. There is no external coercion, no outside compulsion that makes us sin. Our will, through bound to wickedness on this side of Eden, is still self-chosen" (77).

"God has made us responsible for our actions, which have real and eternally significant results. In all his [[7.04 Providence|providence]] acts, God will preserve these characteristics of responsibility and significance."

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Horton, Michael, Justin Holcomb, and Walter Strickland. "Compromise and Resistance: Theology's Battle with Liberalism in the 20th Century.' *White Horse Inn Podcast.* November 23, 2025. [https://open.spotify.com/episode/18wycDN9iVz6YsOhreTYPz?si=21aefe48fed54786 | Spotify Link]</mark>

Someone asked him (Barth), Do you believe in universal salvation? He says no, I believe in universal election, but everyone is electing Christ. Christ is the one reprobate and elect man. Everyone is in him, but he stopped short" (18:18)

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Saint Augustine. *City of God*. Translated by Henry Bettenson. London, England: Penguin Books, 2003. </mark>

Man could not upset the divine purpose by his sin, in the sense of compelling God to alter his decision. For God in his foreknowledge anticipated both results: he knew beforehand how evil man would become, whom God himself had created good; he also knew what good, even so, he would bring out of man's evil (568).

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Sproul, RC. Truths We Confess: A Systematic Exposition of the Westminster Confession of Faith. Orlando, FL: Reformation Trust, 2019.</mark>

"God bases predestination on His prior knowledge of human decisions" (76)

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Wellum, Stephen. Systematic Theology Volume I. Brentwood, TN: B&H Academic Publishing, 2024.</mark>

"Given the biblical teaching that God knows all things exhaustively and infallibly, a legitimate question arises: if God *knows* all things, including the future free actions of humans, is it true that those actions will necessarily happen. But if this is the case, then the future is somehow predetermined, and if the future is predetermined, how can humans be free in their choices? This question is known as the divine foreknowledge-human freedom problem. The proposed solution to the problem goes in one of two directions, depending on one's view of the nature of human freedom. God infallibly knows everything from himself, due to his own free choice, but that our freedom is compatible with what God has decreed" (634-35).
## The Doctrine of Predestination in History

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Bavinck, Herman. Reformed Dogmatics: Abridged in One Volume. Grand Rapids, MI: Baker Academic, 2011.</mark>

At the Council of Trent, the Roman Catholic Church hardened its stance: Human free will is not totally lost and can do excellent deeds; humans need the gracious prevenient inspiration of the Holy Spirit to do saving god; in children of believers this grace is given in baptism; in adults in Gd's calling; infused grace is not irresistible accepting it enables us to do good works and by a merit of co-divinity earn eternal life" (249).

"The Father knows and loves the Son eternally--from before the foundation of the world, #Matthew_11:27; #John_17:24--and the Spirit searches the deep things of God, #1_Corinthians_2:10. All these works of God are Immanent. All God's decrees, even election and reproach, are made visible to us in the progress of history. They are, however, rooted in God's eternal foreknowledge and foreordination, which stands forever and will come to pass. From the beginning, the human race was split into two groupings: the God-fearing, the holy line of Seth, #Genesis_4:25-26; #Genesis_5:1-32, and the line of Cain, which increasingly alienated itself from God, #Genesis_4:17-24. God chose Noah, and after him his son Shem. Abraham is chosen (Genesis 12); his son Isaac, not Ishmael, is the child of promise, #Genesis_17:19-21. Here, God's purpose of election is antecedent to the facts of history; history serves to affirm that preexisting purpose. All things happen in accordance with that counsel; it stands forever, and no one can withstand it, #Isaiah_14:25-27; #Isaiah_46:10; #Psalm_33:11; #Proverbs_19:21" (246).

"God's purposive acting is elective; not all are saved. #Romans_1_9 is sometimes cited against this as proof that God's acting has both its cause and its operation in time. That the ground of election is found exclusively in God's grace, love, and good pleasure is also taught in other Scriptures, #Matthew_11:25; #Luke_12:32; #Ephesians_1:5,9, 11; #2_Timothy_1:9-10)" (247).

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.</mark>

"Predestination did not form an important subject of discussion in history until Augustine" (99).

Augustine of Hippo versus Pelagius: "According to Pelagius, foreordination to salvation or damnation is founded on prescience. Pelagius did not admit to absolute predestination, but rather to a conditional predestination. Augustine himself was inclined to this view, but a deeper reflection on the sovereign character of God's good pleasure led him to see that predestination was in no way dependent on God's foreknowledge of human actions, but rather the basis of the divine foreknowledge. God foreknows what EH will Himself do, while He can foreknow what He will not do, as all sins; and speak of the elect as subjects of predestination, and of the reprobate as subjects of divine foreknowledge." (99).

Augustine sees that predestination to damnation is equivalent to predestination to salvation. The Semi-Pelagians, who reasserted the doctrine of a predestination based on foreknowledge, opposed Augustine.

During the Reformation, the Augustinian position was seen as the absolute truth; however, unlike the Semi-Pelagian argument, a new opposition emerged: the Arminians. "Due to the Arminian assault on the doctrine, the Canons of Dort contain a clear and detailed statement of predestination. The Arminian church was supplanted by conditional predestination" (100).

"Friedrich Schleiermacher had an entirely different form. [[1.03 Science and Religion|Religion]]was regarded as a feeling of absolute dependence, a Hinneigung zum Weltall, a consciousness of utter dependence on the causality that is proper to the natural order with its invariable laws and second causes, predetermining all human resolves and actions. Predestination was identified with natural predetermination or the universal causal connection in the world" (100-01).

Karl Barth believes that man is not the object of election or reprobation, but rather the arena in which election or reprobation occurs. If man responds to God's revelation by faith, he is what God intended him to be, an elect; but if he does not answer, he remains a reprobate" (101).

## The Parts of Predestination

### Election

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Allison, Gregg. Sojourners and Strangers: The Doctrine of the Church. Wheaton, IL: Crossway: 2012.</mark>

"This election was not based on the size or significance of the Jewish people, but it was a gracious choice that resulted in Jehovah's powerful salvific work, liberating them from slavery in Egypt and his mighty acts to defeat the Canaanites and establish his people in the Promised Land of Israel" (79).

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Bavinck, Herman. Reformed Dogmatics: Abridged in One Volume. Grand Rapids, MI: Baker Academic, 2011.</mark>

The divine decrees or the counsel of the triune God faced controversy. For Pelagius and Semi-Pelagians, human nature was not corrupted by the fall. Sin is never a condition of human nature; all sin is a free act of the will. Salvation is for us to will, for God to complete. By contrast, Augustine of Hippo insisted that the elect are chosen because they believed, but so that they might feel. God's sovereign will is the only ground of predestination, which includes both election and reprobation. Augustine insisted that God does not foreordain destruction and the means that lead to it—namely, sin—in the same sense in which He foreordains salvation and the means that lead to it. Reprobation is an act of divine justice, as election is an act of grace" (248).

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.</mark>

"The Bible speaks of election in more than one sense. There is (1) the election of Israel as a people for special privileges and special services, #Deuteronomy_4:37; #Deuteronomy_7:6-8; #Deuteronomy_10:15; #Hosea_13:5 and (2) the election of individuals to some office, or the performance of some special service, as Moses, #Exodus_3, the priests, #Deuteronomy_18:5; the kings, #1_Samuel_10:24; #Psalm_78:70, the prophets, #Jeremiah_1:5 and the apostles #John_6:70; #Acts_9:15, (3) the election of individuals to be children of God and heirs of eternal glory, #Matthew_22:15; #Romans_11:5; #1_Corinthians_1:27; #Ephesians_1:4; #1_Thessalonians_1:4; #1_Peter_1:2; #2_Peter_1:10)" (104)

"It may be defined as that eternal act of God whereby He, in His sovereign good pleasure, and on account of no foreseen merit in them, chooses a certain number of men to be the recipients of special grace and eternal salvation" (104).

"God's eternal purpose to save some of the human race in and by Jesus Christ" (104).

Election is unconditional. Election does not in any way depend on the foreseen faith or good works of man, as the Arminians teach, but exclusively on the sovereign good pleasures of God, who is also the originator of faith and good works, #Romans_9:11; #Acts_13:48; #2_Timothy_1:9; #1_Peter_1:2)" (105).

Election is irresistible and unconditional. It does not depend on the foreseen faith or good works of man, as the Arminians teach, but exclusively on the sovereign good pleasures of God, who is also the originator of faith and good works, #Romans_9:11; #Acts_13:48; #2_Timothy_1:9; #1_Peter_1:2). Man cannot oppose it.

"The purpose of this eternal election is twofold: (1) the proximate purpose is the salvation of the elect. The idea that a man is chosen or elected for salvation is taught in the Word of God #Romans_11:7-11; #2_Thessalonians_2:13). (2) The final aim is the glory of God" (106).

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">DeMarest, Bruce. *The Cross and Salvation: The Doctrine of Salvation*. Crossway, Wheaton, IL: 1997.</mark>

"A number of pre-Augustinian authorities thus viewed salvation synergistically, the human will freely cooperating with the Spirit to the attainment of salvation. Foreknowledge precedes foreordination" (99).

"The Lord has made our nature free to choose. Nor does he impose necessity on us, but furnishes suitable remedies and allows everything to hinge on the sick man's own judgement. God elects persons based on his foreknowledge of their personal worthiness" (100).

"Christ died for all, and God wills that all people be saved, #1_Timothy_2:4, #2_Peter_3:9. Moreover, personal obligation is limited to one's ability to perform" (101).

"Reformers and high Calvinists concluded from the logic of divine sovereignty that God in eternity past chose certain persons to be elected to life and others to be damned to death. They judged the decree of reprobation to be the logical correlate of the decree of election" (107).

"Luther insisted that because the sinner's will is in bondage to corruption, it consistently resists the truth of the Gospel. God has taken salvation out of my will and has put it into His own and has promised to save me, not by my own works or effort but by His grace and mercy" (108).

Luther steadfastly affirmed that God's omnipotence is the cause of all occurrences. God rejected several men and elected and predestined others to everlasting life, such is the truth. The will of the divine majesty purposely abandons and reprobates some to perish" (108).

Stressing the absolute sovereignty of God, Galvin attributed every occurrence to God's efficient will; he judged the thesis of permission of subterfuge that diminishes God's glory. Calvin viewed election and reprobation as parallel decrees within the single will of God" (108).

"Sin has destroyed the [[8.03 Imago Dei (The Image of God) | imago]], Karl Barth asserted that sinners are powerless to facilitate their own salvation. The Calvinist view posits a hidden, antecedent will of God, independent of Jesus Christ, who is the beginning and the culmination of God's saving purposes. It regards election as a state, a fixed decision rather than a dynamic history between God and persons. And it suggests that God is for some people and against others, whereas the Gospel is Good News for all" (111).

God predestined those who were foreknown to exercise faith in Christ. Sinners cannot take the first step toward God unless they are enabled by God's Spirit (114).

Augustine believed that the term foreknowledge sometimes signifies predestination. Depraved sinners' inability morally and spiritually ruins the equation of divine foreknowledge with more prescience" (115).

"The source of election is God, Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed us in the heavenly realms with every spiritual blessing. In the fact of the election, we were also chosen, having been predestined according to the plan of him who works out everything in conformity with the purpose of his will. The time of election: from eternity past, before the creation of the world, #2_Thessalonians_2:13, #2_Timothy_1:9, the objects of election, we, or us. Paul envisaged the elect both in their corporate standing as the church and their individuality. The sphere of election in Christ affirms God's purpose to effect salvation through he person and work of Jesus Christ, #Ephesians_2" (132-133).

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">DeYoung, Kevin. Daily Doctrine. Wheaton, IL: Crossway, 2025.</mark>

"The terms election and predestination are often used interchangeably; both refer to God's gracious decree whereby He chooses some for eternal life. The elect is always a positive designation in Scripture (Matthew 24:31), suggesting that election implies eternal life. The opposition is reprobation, also known as double predestination. This site believes that God not only predetermines those who will be saved but also predestinates those who will not be saved" (79-80).

### Reprobate

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Bavinck, Herman. Reformed Dogmatics: Abridged in One Volume. Grand Rapids, MI: Baker Academic, 2011.</mark>

In all these things God's will and power become manifest and reveal his absolute sovereignty" (258).

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.</mark>

"Reprobation may be defined as that eternal decree of God whereby He has determined to pass some men by with the operations of His special grace, and to punish them for their sins, to the manifestation of HIs justice" (106).

Reprobate consists of two elements: (1) preterition or the determination to pass by some men; and (2) condemnation (sometimes called pre-condemnation) or the determination to punish those who have passed by for their sins.

See [The Belgic Confession](https://www.crcna.org/welcome/beliefs/confessions/belgic-confession)

"The decree of election inevitably implies the decree of reprobation. If the all-wise God, possessed of infinite knowledge, has eternally purposed to save some, then He *ipso facto* also purposed not to save others" (108).

"We cannot avoid the notion of double predestination. While Scripture seldom speaks of reprobation as an eternal decree, it does recognize, even in the adverse events of history, such as suffering, hardening, and inexplicable distances, the active, sovereign will of God.

- God rejects Cain #Genesis_4:5
- Curses Canaan #Genesis_9:25
- Expels Ishmael #Genesis_21:12; #Romans_9:7; #Galatians_4:30
- Hates Esau #Genesis_25:23-26; #Malachi_1:2-3; #Romans_9:13; #Hebrews_12:17
- Permits the Gentiles to walk in their ways #Acts_16
- The Lord rejects his own people and particular persons #Deuteronomy_29:28; #1_Samuel_15:23, 26, 16:1; #2_Kings_17:20; #2_Kings_24:27; #Psalm_53:5; #Psalm_78;67; #Psalm_9:12; #Psalm_10:20, 27; #Pslam_11:10; 144; #Psalm_31:37, #Hosea_4:6; #Hosea_9:17)
- God's rejection is more than a divine response to sin:
- hatred #Malachi_1:2-3; #Romans_9:12
- Cursing #Genesis_9:25
- Hardening #Exodus_4:21; #Exodus_7:3; #Exodus_9:12; #Exodus_10:20; #Exodus_14:4, #Deuteronomy_2:30; #Joshua_11:20; #1_Samual_2:25; #Psalm_105:25; #John_12:40; #Romans_9:18)
- Blinding and stupefaction #Isaiah_6:9; #Mathew_13:13; #Mark_4:12; #Luke_8:10; #John_12:40; #Acts_28:26; #Romans_11:8)
- God's reign covers all things. He sends
- Lying spirits #1_Kings_22:23; #2_Chronicles_18:22)
- through Satan stirs up David ( #2_Samual_24:1; #1_Chronicles_21:1)
- Test Job #Job_1
- calls Nebuchadnezzar and Cyrus his servants #2_Chronicles_36:22; #Ezra_10:5
- Delivers Christ into the hands of his enemies #Acts_2:23; #Acts_4:28

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">DeMarest, Bruce. *The Cross and Salvation: The Doctrine of Salvation*. Crossway, Wheaton, IL: 1997.</mark>

"Reprobation means that God purposefully devoted to destruction whomsoever he pleased" (109).

"God's hardening of Pharaoh's heart, #Exodus_4:21, #Exodus_7:3, #Exodus_9:12 supports the thesis of unconditional reprobation to damnation. But before mentioning the divine hardening, Scripture indicates that Pharaoh freely opposed God's purposes, #Exodus_9:15, #Exodus_9:7, #Exodus_13:15, #1_Samuel_6:6. The Bible does not explain the nature of the hardening. Still, it appears that God's role was to confirm Pharaoh's decisions rather than to predestine them. "
#### Supra- and Infralapsarianism

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Bavinck, Herman. Reformed Dogmatics: Abridged in One Volume. Grand Rapids, MI: Baker Academic, 2011.</mark>

"The key issue here is whether to consider the decree to elect and to reprobate logically before (supra-) or after (infra-) the decree to create and to permit the fall. The counsel of God is to be understood as his eternal plan for all that exists or will happen in time. Scripture everywhere assumes that all that is and comes to pass is the realization of God's thought and will and has its model and foundation in God's eternal counsel. God is not identified with his decree; his self-knowledge is not exhausted in creation, providence, and redemption" (251-53).

"Supralapsarianism has in its favor that it refrains from all useless attempts to justify God and simply attributes both election and reprobation to God's sovereign good pleasure. Facing the charge that their views make God the author of sin, supralapsarianism vigorously denies this and introduces important distinctions between various causes of both sin and reprobation. God is not the author of sin. Sin is not outside of God's will and yet contrary to it, with happy inconsistency supralapsarians too need to introduce nations such as permissions, foreknowledge, dereliction, ad preterition concerning sin; no one can come up with better ones" (256-67).

"The truth inherent in supralapsarianism is that all the decrees together form a unity; that there is an ultimate goal to which all things are subordinated and serviceable; that the entrance of sin to the world did not take God by surprise but was willed by him; that creation was designed to make re-creation possible; and that int he creation of Adam, things were structured with a view to Christ" (257).

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.</mark>

"The doctrine of predestination has not always been presented in the same form. Especially since the days of the Reformation, two different conceptions of it gradually emerged, which were designated during the Arminian controversy as Infra- and Supralapsarianism. Was the first sin of man, constituting his fall, predestinated, or was this merely the object of divine foreknowledge? In their original form, Supralapsarianism held the former, and Infralapsarianism, the latter" (108-09).

"Both Supra- and Infralapsarians admit that the fall is included in [[7.01 The Divine Decree of God in General|the Divine Decrees of God]], and that preterition is an act of God's sovereign will" (109).

"Supralapsarians include the decree to create and to permit the fall in the decree of predestination, while Infralapsarians refer it to the decree of God in general, and exclude it from the special decree of predestination" (110).

Supralapsarianism emphasizes the sovereignty of God, while Infralapsarianism stresses the mercy and justice of God.

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">DeYoung, Kevin. Daily Doctrine. Wheaton, IL: Crossway, 2025.</mark>

For a brief outline of these two positions, please refer to Kevin DeYoung's Daily Doctrine, pages 80-81, where he discusses the order of the decrees. "The reference in Romans 9:11, infralapsarianism argues, is a statement about merit--neither son was more deserving of salvation than he others. Besides, Romans 9:14 describes election as God having mercy on whom he will have mercy" (80-81).