## The Doctrine of Creation in History

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Bavinck, Herman. Reformed Dogmatics: Abridged in One Volume. Grand Rapids, MI: Baker Academic, 2011.</mark>

"God is the sole, unique, and absolute cause of all that exists, #Genesis_1:2-3; #Psalm_33:6; #Psalm_104:29-30; #Psalm_148:5; #Job_26:13. He speaks and hating spring into being, #Genesis_1:3 #Psalm_33:9; #Romans_4:17; From him and through him and to him are all things, #Romans_11:36; #1_Corinthians_8:6; the world is the product of his will, #Psalm_33:6; #Revelations_4:11, the revelation of his perfection #Proverbs_8:22; #Job_28:23; #Psalm_104:1; #Jeremiah_10:12. It finds its goal in his glory" (263)

Friedrich Schleiermacher rejected the distinction between creation and [[7.04 Providence|Providence]]. He considered the question whether the world was temporal or eternal a matter of indifference, provided one upheld the absolute dependence of all things on God" (265).

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.</mark>

"The Christian Church from the very beginning taught the doctrine of creation *ex nihilo* and as a free act of God. This doctrine was accepted with singular unanimity from the start. It is found in the works of Justin Martyr, Irenaeus, Tertullian, Clement of Alexandria, Origen, and other early Christian writers. Theophilus was the first Church Father to stress the fact that the days of creation were literal" (117).

"During the trinitarian controversy, some of them emphasized the fact that in distinction from the generation of the Son, which was a necessary act of the Father, the creation of the world was a free act of the triune God. Augustine of Hippo dealt with the work of creation more in detail than others did" (117).

Augustine of Hippo suggested a somewhat different view. He strongly defended the doctrine of *creatio ex nihilo*, but distinguished two moments of creation: the production of matter and spirits out of nothing, and the organization of the material universe" (118).

"Scholastics debated a great deal about the possibility of eternal creation.  The doctrine of creation with or in time carried the day. Seemingly, the days of creation were regarded as ordinary days, though Anselm of Canterbury suggested that it might be necessary to conceive of them as different from our present days" (118).

"The scriptural proof for the doctrine of creation is not found in a single and limited portion of the Bible, but is found in every part of the Word of God. It does consist of a few scattered passages of doubtful interpretation, but of a large number of clear, unequivocal statements, which speak of the creation of the world as a historical fact" (118).

1. "Passages which stress the Omnipotence of God in the work of creation, #Isaiah_40:26; 28; #Amos_4:13.
2. Passages which point to His exaltation above nature as the great and infinite God, #Psalm_90:2; #Psalm_102:26; 27; #Acts_17:24.
3. Passages which refer to the wisdom of God in the work of creation, #Isaiah_40:12-14; #Jeremiah_10:12-16; #John_1:3.
4. Passages regarding creation from the point of view of God's sovereignty and purpose in creation, #Isaiah_43:7; #Romans_1:25.
5. Passages that speak of creation as a fundamental work of God #1_Corinthians_11:9; #Colossians_1:16" (119).

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Saint Augustine. *City of God*. Translated by Henry Bettenson. London, England: Penguin Books, 2003. </mark>

"The God of our worship is he who has created all beings, and ordered the beginning and the end of their existence and their motion" (291).

"He has created, and he directs, the universal fire, so fierce and violent, to ensure the equilibrium of the natural order in all its vastness. He is creator and regulator of all the waters; he made the sun, the brightest of all material means of light, and gave ot it the requisite force and movement" (291-92).

He supplies seed and nourishment, whether dry or liquid, to all living creatures, distributing what is appropriate to the needs of each" (292).

He has granted to human intelligences, created by himself, the knowledge of the various arts designed to help man to live and to develop his possibilities (292).

## The Idea of Creation

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Bavinck, Herman. Reformed Dogmatics: Abridged in One Volume. Grand Rapids, MI: Baker Academic, 2011.</mark>

"Creatio ex nihilo, out of nothing, preserves the essential distinction between the Creator and the world and the contingency of the world in dependence on God" (276).

"God the Almighty is the infinite and sovereign owner of heaven and earth. He speaks, and it comes into being; he commands, and it is sanctified. He and his will create all things, dependent on him and are of him, through him, unto him. God alone is the eternal and imperishable one; there is no hint of an eternal formless matter" (267).

The triune God, not any intermediary, is the author of creation. Irenaeus already pointed out that in creating, God needed no alien instruments, including angels. Augustine of Hippo puts it even more strongly: By this supremely, equally, and immutably good Trinity, all things are created so that the entire creation bears the stamp of the Trinity. Scripture is clear. God created all things through his Son #Psalm_33:6; #Proverbs_8:22; #John_1:3; #John_5:17; #1_Corinthians_8:6; #Colossians_26:13; #Hebrews_1:3 and through the Spirit #Genesis_1:2; #Psalm_33:6; #Psalm_104:30; #Job_26:13; #Isaiah_40:13 and #Luke_1:35" (269).

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.</mark>

"The faith of the Church in the creation of the world is expressed in the very first article of the [Apostolic Confession of Faith](). This expression of faith of the early Church is that God, by His almighty power, brought forth the universe out of nothing. The words "Maker of heaven and earth" were not originally part of the creed but were added later. Creation was understood in the early Church in the strict sense of bringing something forth out of nothing. But the term denotes a secondary creation, in which God made use of material that was already in existence but could not of itself have produced the result indicated, #Genesis_1:21, 27, #Genesis_5:1; #Isaiah_45:7, 12; #Isaiah_54:16; #Amos_4:13; #1_Corinthians_11:9; #Revelations_10:6" (119).

"Creation in the strict sense of the word may be defined as that free act of God whereby, He, according to His sovereign will and for His glory, in the beginning brought forth the while visible and invisible universe, without the use of pre-existent material, and thus gave it an existence, distinct from His own and yet always dependent on Him" (120).

"The second and third persons are not dependent powers or mere intermediaries, but independent authors together with the Father. The work was not divided among the three persons, but the whole work through the different aspects is ascribed to each of the persons. All things are at once out of the Father, through the Son, and in the Holy Spirit. In general, it may be said that being is out of the Father, thought is out of the Son, and life is out of the Holy Spirit. Since the Father takes the initiative in the work of creation, it is often ascribed to Him economically" (120).

"The bible teaches us that God created all things, according to the counsel of His will, #Ephesians_1:11; #Revelation_4:11, and that He is self-sufficient and is not dependent on His creatures in any way #Job_22:2; #Acts_17:25" (121).

"The will of God is the cause of the world" (124).

It was creation out of nothing, creation in the strict sense of the word, and therefore the only art of the work recorded in #Genesis_1 to which Calvin would apply the term. But even in the remaining part of the chapter, God is represented as calling forth all things by the word of His power, by a simple divine fiat. The same truth is taught in such passages as #Psalm_33:6, nine, and #Psalm_148:5. The strongest passage is #Hebrews_11:3. Creation is here represented as a fact which we apprehend only by faith" (125).

"God is not only the transcendent God, infinitely exalted above all His creatures; He is also the Immanent God, who is present in every part of His creation, and whose Spirit is operative in all the world. God is Spirit, and just because He is Spirit, He is everywhere present as a whole. He is said to fill heaven and earth #Psalm_139:7-10; #Jeremiah_23:34, to constitute the sphere in which he live and move and have our being #Acts_17:28, to renew the face of the earth by His Spirit #Psalm_104:30, to dwell in those that are of a broken heart (Psalms 51:11; Isaiah 57:5) and in the Church as His temple, #1_Corinthians_3:16; #1_Corinthians_6:19; #Ephesians_2:22. Both Transcendence and Immanence find expression in the single passage of Scripture, namely #Ephesians_4:6 where the apostle says that we have One God and Father of all, whose i over all, ad through all, and in all" (126).

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Bray, Gerald. God Has Spoken: A History of Christian Theology. Wheaton, IL: Crossway, 2024.</mark>

"When Genesis 1 says that the universe is good, it is not speaking in moral or spiritual terms, but in physical ones" (165).

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">DeYoung, Kevin. Daily Doctrine. Wheaton, IL: Crossway, 2025.</mark>

"The Christian account of creation is unique, especially when it is coupled with the Christian belief in the incarnation. It is because God is Transcendence that we can truly experience His Immanence. It is because God is transcendent that we can truly experience His Immanence.  Only a God distinct from his creation can enter into a genuine personal relationship with his creatures as an act of love and self-sacrifice rather than an act of personal liberation and self-actualization" (89).

"Divine glory is that end for which God created the world. We must never suppose that God created the cosmos out of lack — because He wanted a relationship, or He wanted someone to love. God did not create he world because he was tired. Rather, God created the world because it is the nature of a foundation to overflow. Creation is the superabundance of divine goodness, beauty, mercy, love, wisdom, power, sovereignty, self-sufficiency, self-existence, justice, holiness, faithfulness, and freedom" (92).

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Ferguson, Sinclair. The Holy Spirit: Contours of Christian Theology. Downers Grove, IL: InterVarsity Press, 1996.</mark>

"He came first on Jesus as the head of the new creation, equipping him for service as the second man and the last Adam who would restore a righteous dominion, #1_Corinthians_15:45-49; #Genesis_1:26-28; #Psalm_8:3-8). As in the Old Testament era, so in the New, his activity is soteriological, communal, cosmic, and eschatological, and involves the transformation of the individual, the governing of the church and the world, and the bringing in of the new age" (94).

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Grudem, Wayne. Systematic Theology. Grand Rapids, MI: Zondervan Academic. 2020.</mark>

"The Bible requires us to believe that God created the universe out of nothing. It is then said that the Bible teaches creation ex nihilo. This means that before God began to create the universe, nothing else existed except God himself" (338).

"Because God created the universe out of nothing, it has meaning and a purpose. God, in His wisdom, created it for a purpose. We should strive to understand that purpose and utilize creation in ways that align with it, namely, to bring glory to God Himself. Moreover, whenever the creation brings us joy, we should give thanks to the God who made it all" (340-41).

"This creation of the entire universe includes the creation of an unseen, spiritual realm of existence. God created the angels and other kinds of heavenly beings, as well as animals and man. He also created heaven as a place where his presence is especially evident. The creation of the spiritual realm is certainly implied in all the verses above that speak of God creating not only the earth, but also heaven and what is in it #Revelation_10:6; #Acts_4:24" (341).

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Hays, Gary Edward and Mark L. Strauss, Ed. The Pentateuch: Life in the Presence of God. Brentwood, TN: B&H Academic: 2004.</mark>

"Genesis 1:1 serves as an introductory summary or overview of the entire creation account described in the rest of #Genesis_1 and #Genesis_2. That God created everything out of nothing is certainly implied but not stated directly in Genesis #Exodus_20:11; #Acts_4:24; #Acts_14:15; and #Acts_17:24)" (25).

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Horton, Michael. *Rediscovering the Holy Spirit: God's Perfecting Presence in Creation, Redemption, and Everyday Life.* Grand Rapids, MI: Zondervan, 2017.</mark>

But nothing in creation ever completes God. The triune God is eternally and unchangeably complete in the nature that the three persons share as well as in their mutual love and joy. The external works of the divine persons in the economy of creation, redemption, and consummation in no way constitute the identity either of the persons or the divine being that they share. God does not undergo any becoming or self-realization of his identity by his involvement in history (34).

He is the builder, carrying with him the plans of the Father and the materials purchased by the Son as he builds a sanctuary according to all that he has received (47). 

Neither divine nor demonic, this world is the theater of God's glory (48).

Creation is not the overflowing of God's being but the effect of God's word. The power of the speech is asymmetrical, of course. Yahweh's word never returns to him without accomplishing its intended purpose, #Isaiah_55:11 (54).

The Father spoke creation into existence; the Son is the archetypal image of God, according to whose likeness we were created, but Adam became a living being when God breathed into his nostrils the breath of life (56).

The demonic unraveling of creation will not be the last word. The evil one has been cast out of this world by Christ's death and resurrection. Now the Spirit who hovered over the waters in creation, who fashioned created space into a habitable place for communion with humans and then animated them with natural life, has given them supernatural life. The spirit draws them into a higher communion with God and each other than Adam and Eve knew before the fall (57).

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Owen, John. *The Holy Spirit*. Banner of Truth Trust: Puritan Paperback, Carlisle, PA: 1998</mark>

"Creation is the special work of the Father, salvation is the special work of the Son, and the special work of the Holy Spirit is to bring salvation to sinners, enabling them to receive it. The Father beings, the Son upholds, and the Holy Spirit completes all things, #Romans_11:36, #Colossians_1:17, #Hebrews_1:3" (10).

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Sproul, RC. Truths We Confess: A Systematic Exposition of the Westminster Confession of Faith. Orlando, FL: Reformation Trust, 2019.</mark>

"Creation had neither a material nor an instrumental cause" (101).
### The Doctrine of Angels in History

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.</mark>

"There is clear evidence of belief in the existence of angels from the very beginning of the Christian era" (132).

Angels were regarded as blessed spirits, superior to men in knowledge, and free from the encumbrance of gross material bodies. Augustine of Hippo emphasized that the good angels were rewarded for their obedience with the gift of perseverance, which assured them they would never falter. Pride was still regarded as the cause of Satan's fall, but the idea that the rest of the angels fell as a result of their lusting after some held the daughters of men. See #Genesis_6:2.

Some hold that angels were created in a state of grace, but the more common opinion was that they were made in a state of natural perfection only.

"The period of the Reformation brought nothing new respecting the doctrine of angels. Both Martin Luther and John Calvin had a vivid conception of their ministry, and particularly of the presence and power of Satan. The latter stresses the fact that he is under divine control, and that, while he is sometimes the instrument of God, he can only work within prescribed limits" (133).

See the [Belgic Confession](https://www.crcna.org/welcome/beliefs/confessions/belgic-confession), Article XII, which deals with creation: "He also created the angels good to be His messengers and to serve His elect: some of whom are fallen from that excellency, in which God created them, into everlasting perdition: and the others have, by the grace of God, remains steadfast, and continued in their primitive state. The devils and evil spirits are so depraved that they are enemies of God and every good thing to the utmost of their power, as murderers watching to ruin the Church and every member thereof, and by their wicked stratagems to destroy all, and are therefore, by their wickedness, adjudged to eternal damnation, daily expecting their horrible torments" (134).

### The Nature of Angels

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Bavinck, Herman. Reformed Dogmatics: Abridged in One Volume. Grand Rapids, MI: Baker Academic, 2011.</mark>

"The name angels does not derive from their nature, but from their office" (277).

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.</mark>

All religions recognize the existence of a spiritual world.  "It is not certain that those passages which speak of the creation of the host of heaven #Genesis_2:1; #Psalm_33:6; #Nehemiah_9:6 refer to the creation of the angels rather than to the creation of the starry host; but #Psalm_148:2,5 5, and #Colossians_1:16 speak of the creation of the angels" (135).

The time of the creation of angels, however, cannot be fixed definitively.

Angels "are rational, moral, and immortal beings. This means that they are personal beings endowed with intelligence and will" (136).

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Grudem, Wayne. Systematic Theology. Grand Rapids, MI: Zondervan Academic. 2020.</mark>

"Scripture sometimes uses other terms for angels, such as sons of God #Job_1:6; #Job_2:1 holy one #Psalm_89:5, 7), spirits #Hebrews_1:14, watchers #Daniel_4:13, 17, 23, thrones, dominions, rulers, and authorities #Colossians_1:16" (516).

"The cherubim were given the task of guarding the entrance to the garden of Eden #Genesis_3:24, and God is frequently said to be enthroned on the cherubim or to travel with the cherubim as his chariot #Psalm_18:10; #Ezekiel_10:1-22. The seraphim are mentioned only in #Isaiah_6:2-7, where they continually worship the Lord and call to one another, 'Holy, holy, holy is the Lord of hosts; the whole earth is full of His glory' #Isaiah_6:3. Both Ezekiel and Revelation tell us of yet other kinds of heavenly being known as living creates around God's throne #Ezekiel_1:5-14; #Revelation_4:6-8" (517).

## Creation of the Material World

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.</mark>

"Theology takes its starting-point in God, allows itself to be guided by HIs special revelation respecting the work of the creation, and considers everything about Him. The narrative of creation sits at he beginning of God's self-revelation and acquaints us with the fundamental relation in which everything, man included, stands to Him" (142).

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Grudem, Wayne. Systematic Theology. Grand Rapids, MI: Zondervan Academic. 2020.</mark>

"God the Father was a primary agent in initiating the act of creation. However, the Son and the Holy Spirit were also actively involved. The Son is often described as the one through whom creation came about. All things were made through him, and without him was not anything that was made #John_1:3. The Holy Spirit was also at work in creation. In #Genesis_1:2, the Spirit of God is described as hovering over the face of the waters. The testimony of Scripture to the specific activity of the Holy Spirit in creation is scarce. The work of the Holy Spirit is brought into much greater prominence in connection with the inspiring of the authors of Scripture and the applying of Christ's redemptive work to the people of God" (343).

"The Bible teaches that God is distinct from his creation. he is not part of it, for he has made it and rules over it. Their term 'Transcendence' is often used to suggest that God is much greater than creation. Very simply, this word means that God is far above the creation in the sense that he is greater than and independent of creation" (343).

"God is also very much involved in creation, for it is continually dependent on him for its existence and its functioning. The technical term used to describe God's involvement in creation is the word' immanence,' meaning remaining in creation (344).

The fact that creation is distinct from God yet always dependent on God, that God is far above creation yet always involved in it" (344).

## Creator Creature Distinction

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Grudem, Wayne. Systematic Theology. Grand Rapids, MI: Zondervan Academic. 2020.</mark>

"God created the universe to show his glory; we must realize that he did not need to create it. We should not think that God needed more glory than he had within the Trinity for all eternity or that he was somehow incomplete without the glory that he would receive from the created universe" (348).

### The Scriptural Account of Creation

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Bray, Gerald. God Has Spoken: A History of Christian Theology. Wheaton, IL: Crossway, 2024.</mark>

"The goodness of creation meant that evil could not be inherent in any part of it. The existence of evil was the result of disobedience and rebellion, not something that was part of creation itself. The implications of this were far-reaching. God's people did not have to fear the world around them. God had given the human race dominion over the other creatures, and told them to exercise the authority that dominion conferred. The doctrine of the goodness of creation and the consequences of reconfiguration of the nature of evil became a fundamental building block of Christian theology. " The incarnation of the Son of God, on which the whole gospel hangs, would have been inconceivable otherwise" (78-79).

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Grudem, Wayne. Systematic Theology. Grand Rapids, MI: Zondervan Academic. 2020.</mark>

"The special creation of Adam and Eve shows that, though we may be like animals in many respects in our physical bodies, we are very different from animals. We are created in God's image, the pinnacle of God's creation, more like God than any other creature, appointed to rule over the rest of creation, appointed to rule over the rest of creation" (342).

"God's eternity means that he has a different kind of existence, an existence without the passage of time, a kind of existence that is difficult for us even to imagine. The fact that God created time reminds us of his lordship over it and our obligation to use it for his glory" (343).

The scriptural account of God's relationship to His creation is distinct from Pantheism. Pantheism is the idea that everything —the whole universe —is God or part of God. Pantheism denies several essential aspects of God's character. If the entire universe is God, then God lacks a distinct personality. God is no longer unchanging because as the universe changes, God also changes" (345).

"The biblical account also rules out Dualism. This concept posits that both God and the material universe have eternally coexisted. Thus, there are two ultimate forces in the universe: God and matter. Thus, there are two ultimate forces in the universe: God and matter" (345).

"The Christian view of creation is also distinct from the viewpoint of deism. Deism is the view that God is no longer directly involved in the creation. Deism generally holds that God created the universe and is far greater than the universe. Some deists also agree that God has moral standards and will ultimately hold people accountable on a day of judgment. They deny God's present involvement in the world, thus leaving no place for his Immanence in the created order" (346).

### Doctrine of Creation versus Evolution

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Grudem, Wayne. Systematic Theology. Grand Rapids, MI: Zondervan Academic. 2020.</mark>

"The word evolution can be used in different ways. Sometimes it is used to refer to microevolution — small changes within a single species, such as the evolution of resistance to insecticides in flies and mosquitoes, the increase in human height, or the development of different colors and varieties of roses. The term "evolution" is more commonly used to refer to macroevolution — that is, the general theory of evolution, also known as Neo-Darwinian evolution theory (344-45).

"Ever since the publication of Charles Darwin's book *On the Origin of Species using Natural Selection*, some Christians have proposed that living organisms came about by the process of evolution that Darwin proposed, but that God guided that process so that the result was just what he wanted it to be. This view is called theistic_evolution because it advocates belief in God and evolution too" (366).

Old Earth versus New Earth