## Providence in General

- Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.

"The word providence has come to signify the provision which God makes for the ends of HIs government and the preservation and government of all His creatures. This sis the sense in which it is now generally used in theology, but it is not the only sense in which theologians have employed it. Francis Turretin defines the term in its widest sense as denoting (1) foreknowledge, (2) foreordination, and (3) the efficacious administration of the things decreed" (158).

"Due to the close connection between the two, the history of the doctrine of providence follows in he main that of the doctrine of [[7.02 Predestination|Predestination]]. Over against the doctrines of fate and chance, Augustine of Hippo stressed the fact that all things are preserved and governed by the sovereign, wise, and beneficent will of God" (158).

"Providence may be defined as that continued exercise of the divine energy whereby the Creator preserves all His creatures; it is operative in all that comes to pass in the world and directs all things to their appointed end. This definition indicates that there are three elements in providence, namely, preservation, concurrence, and government" (159).

"The Bible teaches God's providential control (1) over the universe at large #Psalm_103:9; #Daniel_5:35; #Ephesians_1:11; (2) over the physical world #Job 37:5; #Psalm_104:14; #Psalm_135:6; #Matthew_5:45; (3) over the brute creation #Psalm_104:21; #Matthew_6:28; #Matthew_10:29; (4) over the affairs of nations #Job_12:23; #Psalm_22:28; #Psalm_66:7; #Acts_17:26; (5) over man's birth and lot in life #1_Samuel_16:1; #Psalm_139:16; #Isaiah_45:5; #Galatians_1:15) (6) over the outward successes and failures of men's lives #Psalm_75:6; #Luke_1:52; (7) over things seemingly accidental or insignificant #Proverbs_16:33; #Matthew_10:30; (8) int he protection of the righteous #Psalm_4:8; #Psalm_5:12; #Psalm_64:8 (() in supplying the wants of God's people. and (10) giving answers to prayers" (161).

- Breffle, Josh. *The Hidden Hand of God: Esther 2:19-3:15*. Sermon, October 12, 2025. Windsor Community Church

"Providence - God's superintending activity over human action and history in order to bring all things to its divinely determined goals."

- Sproul, RC. Truths We Confess: A Systematic Exposition of the Westminster Confession of Faith. Orlando, FL: Reformation Trust, 2019.

"God ordained whatever comes to pass. He ordained not only the ends, but also the means. He ordained not only that Christ be crucified, but also the human instruments through whom that crucifixion would come to pass, including Caiaphas, Judas, and Pontius Pilate. Joseph was correct when he said, 'you meant evil against me, but God meant it for good'" (73).

"God not only sustains what He makes but also governs everything He makes. This refers to His absolute sovereignty, His eternal and inalienable right to govern and rule what He owns, and to dispose of those things according to the good pleasure of His will" (127).

"The fact that Christ has taken our punitive wrath does not prevent us from experiencing God's corrective wrath" (140).

- Wellum, Stephen. Systematic Theology Volume I. Brentwood, TN: B&H Academic Publishing, 2024.

"Without a doctrine of providence, the idea of the triune God and his involvement with creation is largely irrelevant to what is happening in the world. Providence reminds us that the triune God of glory is not only the sovereign Creator, but also the covenant Lord. Providence undergirds the Bible's story and the progressive unfolding of God's eternal plan through the biblical covenants centered in our Lord Jesus Christ" (861).
### Preservation

- Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.

"Preservation may be defined as that continuous work of God by which He maintains the things which He created, together with he properties and powers with which He endowed them" (164).

- Grudem, Wayne. Systematic Theology. Grand Rapids, MI: Zondervan Academic. 2020.

"God keeps all created things existing and maintaining the properties with which he created them" (421).

"God, in preserving all things he has made, also causes them to maintain the properties with which he created them. God preserves water so that it continues to act like water. He causes grass to continue to act like grass, with all its distinctive characteristics" (421-22).

See #Hebrews_1:3; #Colossians_1:17; #Acts_17:28; #2_Peter_3:7; #Nehemiah_9:6; #Job_34:14-15;

### Concurrence

- Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.

"Concurrence may be defined as the co-operation of the divine power with all subordinate powers, according to the pre-established laws of their operation, causing them to act and to act precisely as they do" (165).

- Grudem, Wayne. Systematic Theology. Grand Rapids, MI: Zondervan Academic. 2020.

"God cooperates with created things in every action, directing their distinctive properties to cause them to act as they do" (422).

"The psalmist declares that whatever the Lord pleases, he does, in heaven and on earth, in the seas and all deeps (Psalms 135:6), and then in the next sentence he illustrates God's doing of his will in the weather: He it is who makes the clouds rise at the end of the earth, who makes lightning for the rain and brings forth the wind from his storehouses #Psalms_135:7)" (423).

"The doctrine of concurrence affirms that God directs and works through the distinctive properties of each created thing so that these things themselves bring about the results that we see" (425).

### Governance

- Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.

"The divine government may be defined as that continued activity of God whereby He rules all things teleologically to secure the accomplishment of the divine purpose" (169).

- Grudem, Wayne. Systematic Theology. Grand Rapids, MI: Zondervan Academic. 2020.

"God has a purpose in all that he does in the world and he providentially governs or directs all things so that they accomplish his purposes" (439).

"[[7.05 Miracles|Miracles]] are closely connected with God's providence" (470).

- Wellum, Stephen. Systematic Theology Volume I. Brentwood, TN: B&H Academic Publishing, 2024.

"Government emphasizes another component of divine providence: our triune Creator-covenant Lord has a purpose in all that he does in the word. God not only preserves and acts in the world but also continually governs, rules, and directs all things to their appointed end" (873).