- DeYoung, Kevin. Daily Doctrine. Wheaton, IL: Crossway, 2025.

"In [[7.04 Providence|Providence]], God works through the ordinary means of the created order. According to this definition, the birth of a child is not a miracle because it occurs through ordinary biological processes. Cancer going into remission after chemotherapy may be an answer to prayers, but it is not, strictly speaking, a miracle. Miracles are examples of extraordinary providence" (97).

- Grudem, Wayne. Systematic Theology. Grand Rapids, MI: Zondervan Academic. 2020.

"A miracle is a less common kind of God's activity in which he arouses people's awe and wonder and bears witness to himself" (470).

"Miracles are certainly to authenticate the message of the gospel. This was evident in Jesus' ministry, as people like Nicodemus acknowledged: We know that you are a teacher who has come from God, for no one can do these signs that you do unless God is with him (John 3:2) (475).

- Saint Augustine. *City of God*. Translated by Henry Bettenson. London, England: Penguin Books, 2003. 

Mircales are small things for God but important for mortals, to inspire in them a salutary fear and to give them instruction (397).

- Wellum, Stephen. Systematic Theology Volume I. Brentwood, TN: B&H Academic Publishing, 2024.

God's action involves both ordinary and extraordinary actions. But for many Christians, divine action, the [[7.01 The Divine Decree of God in General|Decrees of God]] are associated with extrinsic action alone--miracles--forgetting that both forms are divine action" (729).

"Within a [[3.01 Hermeneutical Frameworks|hermeneutical framework]], miracles are possible because God is the Creator and Lord of his world. It is God who determines what is possible. Even the regularities of nature are an expression of this fact. There is no need to appeal to quantum physics to allow for the possibility of miracles. God has established a regularity and uniformity to creation, which is due to the purpose of the world and our human aspiration to rule and subdue the earth for God's glory" (750).