## The Institutes of Christian Baptism

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Allison, Gregg. Sojourners and Strangers: The Doctrine of the Church. Wheaton, IL: Crossway: 2012.</mark>

"Circumcision belonged to the former covenant: Baptism and the Lord's Supper pertain to the present covenant" (76).

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Bavinck, Herman. Reformed Dogmatics: Abridged in One Volume. Grand Rapids, MI: Baker Academic, 2011.</mark>

"Baptism has its foundation in the circumcision of the Old Testament. John the Baptist instituted water baptism even before Jesus started his public ministry. John's baptism is identifies to that of Jesus' disciples, it is a baptism for the forgiveness of sin #Acts_2:28. Jesus himself was baptized with John's baptism and made no distinction between the baptism administered by his disciples and that of John #John_3:22-23 but adopted the disciples baptized by John without baptizing them again #John_1:37; #Acts_18:25)" (663).

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.</mark>

"Christ instituted baptism after He had finished the work of reconciliation, and this had received the approval of the Father in the resurrection. It is worthy of notice that He prefaced the great commission with the words, "All authority hath been given unto me in heaven and on earth. Clothed with the fullness of the mediatorial authority, He instituted Christian baptism and thus made it binding for all following generations" (651).

"Those who accepted Christ by faith were to be baptized in the name of the triune God, as a sign and seal of the fact that they had entered into a new relation to God, and as such were obliged to live according to the laws of the Kingdom of God" (651).

"The apostles were explicitly instructed to baptize in the name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit. The idea of on the authority of is expressed in #Mark_21:9, 16:17; #Luke_10:17; #John_14:26; #Acts_3:6; #Acts_9:27.

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Sproul, RC. Truths We Confess: A Systematic Exposition of the Westminster Confession of Faith. Orlando, FL: Reformation Trust, 2019.</mark>

"Baptism is the sign of all the blessings, all the benefits God promises us in the new covenant in Jesus Christ" (178).

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Sir Basil the Great. On the Holy Spirit. Trans. Stephen Hildebrand. Yonkers, NY: Saint Vladimir's Seminary Press, 2011.</mark>

"While Baptism perfects faith, Baptism is established by faith, and each is carried out by the same names" (Sir Basil, On the Holy Spirit, 2011: 59).

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Wellum, Stephen. *The 5 Solas Series: Christ Alone: The Uniqueness of Jesus as Savior*, Grand Rapids, MI: Zondervan, 2017.</mark>

Jesus joined other men in John's baptism of repentance, #Acts_12:34, to sympathize and align himself with their plight in his ministry of reconciliation between God and man. A combination of #Psalm_2:7 and #Isaiah_42:1, these words confirm that Jesus heard the Father tell him directly that he is the Son-King (see[[13.01 The Offices of Christ | the offices of Christ]] for the three-fold office) who will bring justice and righteousness to all the nations through the sovereign and saving reign of the Creator-Covenant Lord himself. 

## The Doctrine of Baptism in History

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.</mark>

"The early Fathers regarded baptism as the rite of initiation into the Church, and usually considered it as closely connected with the forgiveness of sins and the communication of the new life" (653).

"Believed in baptismal regeneration" ( 653).

"Infant baptism was already current in the days of Origen and Tertullian, though the latter discouraged it on the ground of expediency. The general opinion was that baptism should never be repeated, but there was no unanimity as to the validity of baptism administered by heretics" (653).

The mode of baptism was not in dispute until the second century, when the mode of baptism slowly gained ground.

"Through this divine efficacy of the Word, the sacrament effects regeneration. In the case of adults, Maring Luther made the effect of baptism dependent on faith in the recipient. Realizing that he could not consider it so in the case of children, who cannot exercise faith, he at one time held that God by His prevenient grace works faith in the unconscious child, but later on professed ignorance on this point" (654).

## The Proper Mode of Baptism

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.</mark>

Immersion - "a surrender of this would be equivalent to giving up baptism itself. The real baptismal idea, they say, is expressed in the going down into and the coming up out of, the water" (655).

Baptism would still be baptism even if one were immersed in something that lacks cleansing properties #Mark_10:38; #Luke_12:50; #Romans_6:3; #Colossians_2:12).

See the Heidelberg Catechism Q69

Adult Baptism = "adult baptism must be preceded by a profession of faith #Mark_16:16; #Acts_2:41; #Acts_8:37).

Differing Views = Adult Baptism (or believer baptism) (or credobaptism) versus infant baptism (or pedobaptism)

The only believers in Christ are entitled to baptism, and only those who give credible evidence of faith in Him should be baptized.

"It may be said at the outset that there is no explicit command in the Bible to baptize children, and that there is not a single instance in which we are plainly told that children were baptized. But this does not necessarily make infant baptism unbiblical:

1. The covenant made with Abraham was spiritual. The spiritual nature of this covenant is proved by the manner in which it promises are interpreted in the New Testament #Romans_4:16-18; #2_Corinthians_6:16-18; #Galatians_3:8; #Hebrews_8:10; #Hebrews_11:9. It follows from the fact the circumcision was clearly a rite that had spiritual significance #Deuteronomy_10:16; #Deuteronomy_30:6; #Jeremiah_4:4; #Jeremiah_9:25; #Acts_15:1; #Romans_2:26-29; #Philippians_3:2).
2. The covenant is still in force and is essentially identical with the new covenant of the present dispensation.