## The Idea of the Means of Grace

- Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.

"Fallen man receives all the blessings of salvation out of the eternal fountain of the grace of God, in virtue of the merits of Jesus Christ and through the operation of the Holy Spirit" (630).

"The whole providential guidance of the saints, through prosperity and adversity, often becomes a means by which the Holy Spirit leads the elect to Christ or to an ever closer communion with Him. It is neither customary nor desirable, however, to include all this under the means of grace. The Church is not a means of grace alongside the Word, the sacraments, because her power in promoting the work of grace of God consists only in the administration of these" (630).

- Bavinck, Herman. Reformed Dogmatics: Abridged in One Volume. Grand Rapids, MI: Baker Academic, 2011.

"The church is Christ on earth, especially in his priestly office, and communicates the fullness of his grace and truth, which serves above all to elevate humans from the natural to the supernatural order. The sacraments were subordinated to the Word and had neither meaning nor power apart from that Word. The most important means of grace is the Word of God" (644-45).

## Characteristics of the Word and the Sacraments as Means of Grace

They are instruments, not of common but of remarkable grace, the grace that removes sin and renews the sinner in conformity with the image of God.

They are in themselves, and not in the virtue of their connection with things not included in them, means of grace.

They are continuous instruments of God's grace, and not in any sense of the work. They are not associated with the operation of God's grace merely occasionally or in a more or less accidental way, but are regularly ordained.

- DeYoung, Kevin. Daily Doctrine. Wheaton, IL: Crossway, 2025.

They are official means of the Church of Jesus Christ. The preaching of the Word and the administration of the sacrament are the means officially instituted in the Church by which the Holy Spirit works and confirms faith in the hearts of men.

1. These are means of remarkable grace, not standard. We are not talking about seeing the good, the true, and the beautiful while hiking in a national park. We are talking bout the grace that brings about redemption.
2. These are means of grace in themselves. The word is the channel of remarkable grace, not the babbling brook or snow-capped peak.
3. The men of grace do not confer grace by mere external application.  The word of God never returns void, but it may not always confer saving grace.
4. These are continuous instruments of God's grace. Word and sacraments are not occasional and accidental, but regular and perpetual channels of divine grace. (308).

### Historical Views Respecting the Means of Grace

## The Word as a Means of Grace

- Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.

"It is the inspired Word of God, the Word of Scripture, which they regard as a means of grace. And even when speaking of this as a means of grace, they contemplate it from a special point of view. The inspired Scriptures constitute the principium cognoscendi, the foundation, of all our theological knowledge" (636).

### The Relation of the Word to the Holy Spirit

The Law and the gospel in the word of God. The Churches of the Reformation, from the very beginning, distinguished between the law and the gospel as the two parts of the Word of God, serving as a means of grace.

The Law and Gospel Distinction

### The Threefold Use of the Law

The law serves the purpose of restraining sin and promoting righteousness. The latter presupposes sin and is necessary due to sin.

## The Sacraments in General

### Relationship Between the Word and the Sacraments

God is the author and instituted the means of grace. Christ is he central context of the manner in which the contents are appropriated, namely, by faith.

#### The Component Parts of the Sacraments

1. The outward or visible sign.
2. The inward spiritual grace is signified and sealed.
3. The union between the sign and that which is signified.

#### The Necessity of the Sacraments