## The Doctrine of the Lord's Supper in History

- Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.

The apostolic era celebrated the Lord's Supper, but it still had its issues, as seen in #1_Corinthians_11:20-22.

"The Reformers, one and all, rejected the sacrificial theory of the Lord's Supper and the medieval doctrine of transubstantiation. They differed, however, in their positive construction of the scriptural doctrine of the Lord's Supper. Luther insisted on the literal interpretation of the words of the institution and on the bodily presence of Christ in the Lord's Supper. He substituted for the doctrine of transubstantiation that of consubstantial, which has been defended at length" (675).

Zwingli denied the literal bodily presence of Christ in the Lord's Supper and offered a figurative interpretation of the words of institution. He saw the sacraments primarily as an act of commemoration, although he did not deny that Christ is spiritually present in them.

Calvin maintained an intermediate position. Like Zwingli, he denied the bodily presence of the Lord in the sacrament, but in distinction from the former, he insisted on the real, though spiritual, presence of the Lord in the Supper.

## The Institute of the Lord's Supper

- Bavinck, Herman. Reformed Dogmatics: Abridged in One Volume. Grand Rapids, MI: Baker Academic, 2011.

"God alone is the distributor of grace. He is also host and administrator of the Supper; he takes the bread and wine, blesses them, and distributes them to his disciples--at the meal of the Last supper but always and wherever his mean is celebrated" (684).

## The Lord's Supper as a Means of Grace

- Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.

"The Lord's Supper is intended for believers and for believers only, and therefore, is not instrumental in originating the work of grace in the heart of the sinner. The presence of God's grace is presupposed in the hearts of the participants. The sacrament merely adds to the effectiveness of the Word and therefore to the measure of the grace received" (684).

The Lord's Supper "is not itself a cause of grace, but merely an instrument in the hand of God. Its effective operation is dependent, not only on the presence, but on the activity, of faith in the recipient" (685).