- Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.

These notes entertain the principles (principia) or foundations of theological thoughts surrounding [[2.03 The Doctrine of Scripture|the Doctrine of Scripture]].

Knowing precisely what the term "Principium" denotes is paramount. It is widely used in [[1.03 Science and Religion|science]] and Philosophy" (87).

God is the [[2.02 The Principium Cognoscendi Externum (Revelation)|principium cognoscendi externum]]. God is the source and foundation of all our knowledge. He possesses an archetypal understanding of all created things, embracing all the ideas expressed in His creation's works.

This [[4.02 The Knowability of God|knowledge of God]] is quite different from that of man. At the same time, we derive our knowledge from the objects we perceive. He knows them in virtue of the fact that He has determined their being from eternity and from" (88).

"The world as God's creation is [[2.02 The Principium Cognoscendi Externum (Revelation)|the principium cognoscendi externum]]; ectypal knowledge is but a faint reproduction of the archetypal knowledge found in God. Just because it is ectypal, there is no complete knowledge, and sin puts its stamp on creation, no clear or true knowledge. God conveyed this knowledge to man by employing the Logos, the Word, as the agent of creation" (88).

[[2.04 The Principium Cognoscendi Internum|The Principium Cognoscendi Internum]] is the objective revelation of God and would be of no avail if there were no subjective receptivity for it. Human reason, with its capacity for knowledge, is the fruit of the Logos. It enables man to discover the divine wisdom in the world around him. It is the Principia or foundations of theological thoughts surrounding the Doctrine of Scripture and its Inspiration, principium cognoscendi internum, and [[1.03 Science and Religion|science]]" (89).

"God is the principium essendi. This is equivalent to saying that all our knowledge of God originates in Him. God possesses a complete and, in every way, perfect knowledge of Himself. All human understanding of God is derived from Him (#Matthew_11:27 and #1_Corinthians_2:10)" (90).

"God revealed Himself in creation, but that original revelation was obscured through the blight of sin. Only God's self-revelation in the Bible can now be considered adequate. It only conveys a [[4.02 The Knowability of God|knowledge of God]] that is pure, free from error and superstition, and that answers to the spiritual needs of fallen man" (90).

"The [[4.02 The Knowability of God|knowledge of God]]and nature of God is archetypal knowledge, which means that He knows the universe as it exists in His eternal idea previous to its existence as a finite reality in time and space; and that His knowledge is not, like ours, obtained from without. God's free knowledge is the knowledge He has of all things actual, that is, of things that exist in the past, that exist in the present, or that will exist in the future" (55).

- Grudem, Wayne. Systematic Theology. Grand Rapids, MI: Zondervan Academic. 2020.

"The Bible refers to the Son of God as the Word of God. In #Revelation_19:13, John sees the risen Lord Jesus in heaven and declares that the name by which He is called is the Word of God. Similarly, at the beginning of John's Gospel, we read, "in the beginning was the Word and the Word was with God" (1:1).

- Owen, John. *The Holy Spirit*. Banner of Truth Trust: Puritan Paperback, Carlisle, PA: 1998.

"Prophecy did two things. It told of things to come and it declared the mind of God, #Exodus_7:1, #Job_33:23; #Romans_12:6; #1_Corinthians_14:31; #1_Chronicles_25:2" (18).

"This perfect revelation was given to us in and by his Son, the Lord Jesus Christ, when he took our nature on himself so that God might graciously reconcile himself to us" (24).

- Saint Augustine. *City of God*. Translated by Henry Bettenson. London, England: Penguin Books, 2003. 

The Mediator spoke in former times through the prophets and later through his own mouth, and after that through the apostes, telling man all that he dcided was enought for man (431). 

- Sproul, RC. Truths We Confess: A Systematic Exposition of the Westminster Confession of Faith. Orlando, FL: Reformation Trust, 2019.

"At the very heart of Christianity is the concept of divine revelation. Christianity is a revealed religion, constructed not based on speculative philosophy but in response to what God Himself has made manifest" (6).
## The Triune Covenant Lord: Theological Overview

- Wellum, Stephen. Systematic Theology Volume I. Brentwood, TN: B&H Academic Publishing, 2024.

"Instead of the problem of God, we are confronted with the glory and majesty of our triune Creator-covenant Lord, who alone is God and worthy of all of our thinking, love, and obedience" (540).

"In Scripture, God identifies himself by several names that reveal who and what he is" (571).

"Yahweh enters into covenant relationships with Adam, Noah, Abraham, Israel, and David, and brings these covenants to fulfillment in Christ Jesus, who is Lord/Yahweh. A crucial way that the NT teaches Christ's deity and unpacks the eternal Father-Son relation is by identifying Jesus with OT Yahweh texts and applying them directly to him as the Creator and Lord and the new covenant head of his people" (573).

To identify God as the Lord is also to identify him as the covenant God, an expression that beautifully captures much of what Scripture teaches regarding God's identity and nature. Therefore, "in scripture, the outworking of God's eternal plan or decree is through the progressive unfolding of six covenants which all reach their fulfillment, telos, and terminus in Christ and the new covenant" (573).

"It is crucial to distinguish God in himself (ad intra) from God in his work (ad extra), or God in the execution of his eternal plan" (574).