## Concept of Revelation

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Bavinck, Herman. Reformed Dogmatics: Abridged in One Volume. Grand Rapids, MI: Baker Academic, 2011.</mark>

"By revelation, God makes himself known to us as the primary efficient cause of all things. Holy Scripture is the external instrumental efficient cause of theology, and divine revelation also requires the internal illumination of the Holy Spirit. God is the essential foundation, the Principium Cognoscendi Externum (Revelation), and the Holy Spirit is the internal principle of knowing, [[2.04 The Principium Cognoscendi Internum|the principium cognoscendi internum]]. Theologians also distinguished God's trinitarian self-knowledge, archetypal knowledge, from the revealed knowledge accommodated to human understanding, ectypal knowledge" (49-50).

"[[1.03 Science and Religion|Religion]] is the bond that unites human beings to God. The Bible provides no general idea of religion but covenantal presents God's revelation as its objective and the fear of the Lord as the subjective side. [[3.02 Covenantalism|Covenantalism]] is the basic term for the divine establishment that grounds Israel's religion" (53).

"True Religion claims the whole person, soul, and body, the mind, the heart, and full strength; it requires that humans begin to serve God with sincere faith, firm hope, and ardent love, with worship in the spirit, and in truth, with the sacrifices of a broken spirit and a contrite heart" (54).

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.</mark>

"The idea of [[1.03 Science and Religion|religion]] naturally leads to revelation as its necessary corollary. In the study of comparative religion, it is increasingly recognized that all regions are based on the revelation of some kind and that there is no purely natural as distinguished from revealed religion" (112).

"If man is ever to know and serve God, that latter must reveal Himself. He can obtain these blessings only if God reveals Himself to man and points out the way of salvation" (113).

"The word revelation is derived from the Latin revelatio, which denotes an unveiling, a revealing. In its active sense, it denotes the act of God by which He communicates to man the truth concerning Himself and His creatures and conveys to him the knowledge of His will. In the passive sense, it is a designation of the resulting product of this activity of God" (113).

"Thomas Aquinas held that natural revelation could lead to the knowledge of God as a unity, and furnished an adequate basis for a scientific theology, but that only special revelation could acquaint man with God as triune and as incarnate in Jesus Christ, and conveyed to man a knowledge of the mysteries of faith" (114).

"God is never an object, but always a subject. In Revelation, all emphasis falls on God's free act. It is God in the act of speaking, and speaking now to this and then to that man, bringing the word home to the soul in faith. Therefore, God's revelation came to man in a great central fact rather than a communication of knowledge. In it, God approaches man not with a teaching to be believed but with a challenge to be met, with a behest or command to be obeyed. However, there is no revelation, even in Christ, until there is faith" (119).

"As a rule, the Bible does not trace the phenomena of nature to secondary causes, but to their primary cause, which is God or the will of God. All revelation of God is supernatural" (123).

"In Friedrich Schleiermacher, the emphasis shifts from the objective to the subjective, from revelation to religion, and without any distinction between natural and revealed religion" (24).

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Horton, Michael. The Christian Faith: A Systematic Theology for Pilgrims On the Way. Grand Rapids, MI: Zondervan Publishing, 2011.</mark>

"God is the object of theology because he is its self-revealing subject. Hidden in incomprehensible majesty, God reveals himself in a manner that is (1) accommodated to our capacities and (2) limited to that which God deems necessary for calling in his name, in Christ, within the context of the covenant of grace" (113).

"Instances that revelation does not well up within a pious individual but comes to one from the outside" (116).

"God's Word not only asserts truth; it creates and destroys, plants and uproots, judges and justifies, kills and makes alive" (119).

"God reveals true propositions and his mighty acts, and he summons us to acknowledge his claim on us. This same act of revelation touches our inner experience and provides a new awareness--but in ways that radically challenge rather than confirm our assumptions, ideas, and experiences" (118).

Word-Revelation vs Act-Revelation

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Owen, John. *The Holy Spirit*. Banner of Truth Trust: Puritan Paperback, Carlisle, PA: 1998</mark>

"The being and nature of God is the foundation of all true religion and holy religious worship in the world, #Romans_1:19-21. The revelation that he gives us himself is the standard of all true religious worship and obedience" (8).

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Waters, Guy Prentiss. For the Mouth of the Lord has Spoken: The Doctrine of Scripture. Glasgow, UK: Bell and Bain, 2001.</mark>

"The recipients of revelation are the intelligent, moral creatures whom this God has made for His own glory, particularly, human beings, #Genesis_1:26-27; #Romans_11:36. Specifically, people are said to be made after God's image and likeness. Since God is represented in Scripture as a God who speaks, the image must include the capacity to reason (15).

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Wellum, Stephen. Systematic Theology Volume I. Brentwood, TN: B&H Academic Publishing, 2024.</mark>

"Truth and theology are not grounded in any concept of God, but only in the God of Scripture, the triune Creator-covenant Lord, who alone is uncreated, independent, self-sufficient, and self-attesting. Only this God knows and plans all things, #Isaiah_46:8-10 & #Ephesians_1:11, and as such, His knowledge is from Himself, not dependent on or correlative to the world. God is the source and standard of truth. God has sovereignly spoken the universe into being ex nihilo, resulting in an ordered, designed, purposed universe, and he has spoken to us in a verbal and written form; we have true knowledge of God's plan and promises, and the world around us" (151).

"One cannot talk about what Scripture is apart from the God who gave it, and that different views of God inevitably result in different views of Scripture. The word "revelation" is from the Latin, revelation, and its basic concept is to unveil, uncover, bring to light, disclose, and/or make known that which is previously hidden, veiled, and/or unknown" (152).

"Word of God emphasizes God's self-communication more, while revelation highlights the content disclosed by God's speech" (154).

"God's word is certainly the total of his communications; everything he has said is and will say. The word is also a title for the divine Son, and it is by His word that God accomplishes His words of creation, providence, redemption, and judgment. God within himself ad intra and God's self-communication to us ad extra" (155).

"Here is a list of some of God's works that are all done by his powerful word:

1. God created all things by his word: #Genesis_1:3, #John_1:1-13, #Hebrews_11:3).

2. God rules providentially over his creation and commands things to happen by his word: #Genesis_1:9, 11, 22, #Genesis_8:21-22; #Job_37:12; #Psalm_18:15, #Psalm_33:111, #Psalm_147:15-18; #Matthew_8:27; #Hebrews_1:3)

3. God judges the universe by his word of power and graciously redeems us by that exact word. Christ must say the word, and the centurion's servant is healed.

4. God effectually calls people savingly to himself by his word: #Isaiah_62:2; #Isaiah_65:15; #Acts_2:39; #Romans_1:6-7; #Romans_8:28; #1_Corinthians_1:2, 24, 26)

5. God planned all things from eternity according to his word. Reformed theology, related to God's decree, is the [[3.02 Covenantalism|covenant of redemption]] by which the triune persons agree to plan and execute the redemption of the elect as one act but according to distinctive roles: #Genesis_1:26, #Psalm_2:7-9; #Matthew_11:25-27; #John_5:20; #John_17:1-1-26; #Acts_2:33-36; #John_4:34, #Revelation_13:8" (156).

"We begin to see that God's word is associated with the power of God's Spirit since Scripture closely links God, his word, and his Spirit" (157).

"God's word reveals him. God's Spirit is present with his word. Human words are said to be God-breathed, and thus, God's word is by the agency of the Spirit. God is a spirit and not a physical being, but He is present with us through His word. For example, God is present in his acts accomplished by his divine speech: creation, providence, redemption, and judgment" (159-60).

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Vos, Geerhardus. Biblical Theology. Grand Rapids, MI: NA, 1948.</mark>

"He was known to Himself alone, and had first to call into being a creature before any extraneous knowledge about Him became possible. Therefore, creation was the first step in producing extra-divine knowledge" (5).

"Sin has deranged the original relation between God and man. It has produced a separation where previously perfect communion prevailed. From the nature of the case, every step toward rectifying this abnormality must spring from God's sovereign initiative". (5).

"Revelation is the interpretation of redemption" (6).
## General Revelations

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Bavinck, Herman. Reformed Dogmatics: Abridged in One Volume. Grand Rapids, MI: Baker Academic, 2011.</mark>

"The human mind was so darkened by sin that it could not rightly know and understand natural revelation. God, therefore, needed to provide the glasses of Scripture to aid our reading of natural revelation" (69).

"The Scriptures do not distinguish between natural and supernatural revelation. Creation revelation is no less supernatural than Scripture; God himself is at work in both, and his providential creating, sustaining, and governing form a single mighty ongoing revelation" (69).

"General revelation fails to point us to sin, divine wrath, and grace; what knowledge of God is given in general revelation is uncertain, inconsistent, mixed with error, and unattainable for most people; and finally no concrete religion has ever existed that matches what deists and history of religions scholars contend is the essential core of natural, rational religion in general" (70-71).

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.</mark>

"Divine thoughts are embodied in the phenomena of nature, the human consciousness, and the facts of experience or history" (125).

"That is, he denies that there is in the work of creation a revelation, from which the natural man can learn to know God, and based on which he can construct a theology, and rejects the analogia entis of the Roman Catholic Church" (127).

"By general revelation, we receive some knowledge of God, His power, goodness, and wisdom, but we do not learn to know Christ, the highest revelation of God, in His redemptive work and His transforming power. And yet, an experimental knowledge of Him is the only way to salvation. Since general revelation knows nothing about grace and forgiveness, it is insufficient for sinners. Moreover, while it teaches certain truths, it changes nothing in the sphere of being. And yet the sinner must be changed, that a new element should be introduced into history and that a new process should be set in motion if the divine purpose is to be realized in the life of mankind" (129).

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Horton, Michael. The Christian Faith: A Systematic Theology for Pilgrims On the Way. Grand Rapids, MI: Zondervan Publishing, 2011.</mark>

"The view that God has revealed himself through what he has made is as old as Genesis, interpreted through the poetry of the #Psalm_8:109; #Psalm_19:1-6 #Psalm_102:25 widely attested in the prophets, confirmed by Jesus and the apostles, with the vision of the whole earth finally has its tongue loosed to sing God's praise" (139).

Michael Horton sees special revelation as the covenant of canon. "There can be no covenant without a canon or canon without a covenant. In fact, the covenant is the canon and vice versa" (155).

"God breathes out all Scripture; the Scripture is not only a record of redemption but is itself the primary means of grace, through which the Spirit applies redemption to sinners in the present" (156).

- Jesus regards the words of Scripture as his Father's own Word: #Matthew_4:4, 7, 10; #Matthew_5:17-20; #Matthew_19:4-6; #Matthew_26:31, 52-54, #Luke_4:16-21; #Luke_16:17; #Luke_18:31-33; #Luke_22:37; #Luke_24:25-27, 45-47; #John_10:35-38).

- Peter insisted that the prophets did not speak for themselves, but as they were carried along by the Holy Spirit: #2_Peter_1:21).


- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Horton, Michael, Justin Holcomb, and Walter Strickland. "Compromise and Resistance: Theology's Battle with Liberalism in the 20th Century.' *White Horse Inn Podcast.* November 23, 2025. [https://open.spotify.com/episode/18wycDN9iVz6YsOhreTYPz?si=21aefe48fed54786 | Spotify Link]</mark>

Karl Barth vs Frederich Schleiermacher --> Barth said "Nein" to General Revelation/Natural Revelation. For Barth, who is not 100% correct, however -->

"What he is doing is putting back an order which Schleiermacher got out of order. So Schleiermacher confuses the subject with the object. Barth puts it back the way it's supposed to be. God is the source God, and there is a certain sense in which he is just trying to get back to biblical categories of creator versus creation (6:08-6:23)."

Theology does not bubble up inside us. 


- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Sproul, RC. Truths We Confess: A Systematic Exposition of the Westminster Confession of Faith. Orlando, FL: Reformation Trust, 2019.</mark>

"God's general revelation is His revelation of Himself principally through nature and history, through the ministry of His providence to His people, and through His works of creation. Paul teaches that all people, by nature, have some knowledge of God's existence, character, power, and deity, because God reveals Himself so clearly in general revelation (Romans 1:18-20). General revelation can be either 'immediate' or 'mediated.' Immediate means "direct, without any medium or intervening agency. God's revealing His law inwardly through the human heart, so that every person is born with the conscience (Romans 2:11-15)" (7).

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Waters, Guy Prentiss. For the Mouth of the Lord has Spoken: The Doctrine of Scripture. Glasgow, UK: Bell and Bain, 2001.</mark>

"Taking Paul's statement in Romans 1 and Romans 2 together, we see that God reveals Himself to all human beings, in every age and place of the world. He reveals not only his being and character but also the moral obligations to which all human beings are subject. The great tragedy of the human condition is that humans, through sin, have turned their backs against this God in willful and culpable rebellion" (26).

"God, then, is the Creator and Sustainer of all things. He exists independently of the creature and is not dependent upon the creation. Even so, He is not removed from the beast, but intimately involved in the life and well-being of the creation, not least human beings (29).

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Wellum, Stephen. Systematic Theology Volume I. Brentwood, TN: B&H Academic Publishing, 2024.</mark>

God speaks to all people in creation and history. God's speech in natural revelation does not consist in literal words; it is an infallible medium of such divine words as such natural revelation conveys God's power, authority, and presence" (164).

"Natural or general revelation is the knowledge that God gives of himself to all peoples at all times and in all places since it is given through the creation, our human constitution and conscience, and by the ordinary experience of living in the world" (192).

"We do not discover God's promises in nature, nor does that natural order produce a Redeemer to act as our covenant representative and substitute" (193).

"Tertullian argued that God's revelation in creation is true and clear such that it results in our just condemnation: This is the crowning guilt of men, that they will not recognize One, of whom they cannot possibly be ignorant" (193).

"John of Damascus says the same things; God's existence is known in creation. God did not leave us in absolute ignorance. For the knowledge of God's existence has been implanted in all by nature" (193).

"In the medieval era, Anselm of Canterbury and Thomas Aquinas insisted on the significance of natural revelation for truth and theology" (198).

Unlike historical theology, Karl Barth was skeptical about our ability to know God from creation. Barth famously affirmed a strong "Nein!" to natural revolution, especially natural theology. He insisted that humans have no inherent capacity to know God apart from God's free decision to reveal himself to us" (197).

"Scripture teaches that God's being, authority, and power are disclosed in the created order. However, human sin and its effects have deeply scarred the order. Creation reveals God's nature and moral will for his creatures. Since the created order is accessible to all people at all times and places, it is a universal revelation" (203).
## Special Revelations

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.</mark>

"These words do not denote a passive becoming manifest but designate a free, conscious, and deliberate act of God, by which He makes Himself and His will known unto Berkhof, Systematic Theology, 2019: 130).

"God dwelt among the cherubim in the days of old #Psalm_80:1; #Psalm_99:1). His presence was seen in a cloud of fire and smoke, #Genesis_15:17; #Exodus_3:2; #Exodus_19:9; #Exodus_33:9, #Psalm_78:14 in stormy winds and the gentle zephyr. These appearances were tokens of God's presence, in which He revealed something of His glory" (131).

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Bray, Gerald. God Has Spoken: A History of Christian Theology. Wheaton, IL: Crossway, 2024.</mark>

"Jesus assumed that the Jewish Scriptures were of divine origin. The redemption Jesus proclaimed was the inheritance of the Jewish people that had been promised to them by the law and the prophets, and he told them that he was fulfilling it before their eyes" (36).

Waters, Guy Prentiss. For the Mouth of the Lord has Spoken: The Doctrine of Scripture. Glasgow, UK: Bell and Bain, 2001.

 "Special revelation is incompressible apart from general revelation. That is to say, general revelation provides the context necessary to understand special revelation" (40).

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Wellum, Stephen. Systematic Theology Volume I. Brentwood, TN: B&H Academic Publishing, 2024.</mark>

God's word in creation is actual knowledge and thus sufficient to condemn people, but it is not enough to know God fully and completely, especially in the context of salvation. Given the noetic effects of sin, fallen humanity apart from God's saving grace now distorts and misinterprets natural revelation. People, by nature, have some knowledge of the existence, character, power, and deity of God, because God so clearly reveals

"God's self-revelation to us does not come in bits and pieces; it is an organized whole, a grand narrative from creation to consummation" (78).

- 
