## The Inspiration of Scripture

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.</mark>

"[[2.02 The Principium Cognoscendi Externum (Revelation)|Revelation]] and inspiration stand in the closet, possibly about each other. As far as Special Revelation is concerned, it may be said that the one is inconceivable without the other. Peter tells us that "no prophecy ever came by the will of man, but men spoke from God, being moved by the Holy Spirit. Recognizing the Bible as God's special revelation depends on the conviction that the Holy Spirit inspired its authors" (142).

"The object or design of revelation is the communication of knowledge. The object or design of inspiration is to secure infallibility in teaching. The effect of revelation was to render its recipient wiser" (142).

"All these centuries, the Church stood firm in the conviction that the Bible is the inspired, and therefore infallible" (142).

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Horton, Michael. *Rediscovering the Holy Spirit: God's Perfecting Presence in Creation, Redemption, and Everyday Life.* Grand Rapids, MI: Zondervan, 2017.</mark>

The seeds are not eternal forms or even ideas in the mind of God but speech-acts--the words planted in the world by the Word himself and brought to fruition by the Spirit (52).

In the inspiration of Scripture, the Spirit acts not only upon the human writers nor merely with them to bring to mind the central content, but within them. The Spirit does not subvert, but rather sanctifies their speech, employing their ordinary linguistic, cultural, social, and personal idiosyncrasies that he has himself brought forth in his providential activity throughout their life to that point (86).

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Wellum, Stephen. Systematic Theology Volume I. Brentwood, TN: B&H Academic Publishing, 2024.</mark>

"1. Inspiration accents God's Triune Action, appropriated by the Spirit, on the human authors, who freely write according to their style and ability and the nature of the resultant text. This double emphasis is taught in two classic texts that together give us our doctrine of inspiration: (1) #2_Peter_1:20-21, which speaks of God's sovereign action in the human authors, and (2) #2_Timothy_3:16, which speaks of the God-breathed text that results from God's action" (290).

"As we think of Scripture's dual authorship, Peter does not spell out the precise relationship between the two. But Peter's use of 'to carry along' implies an effectual work, much stronger than mere guidance. For this reason, inspiration is more than the leading of the Spirit that occurs in ordinary providence; rather, it is an act of extraordinary divine agency, which involves a sovereign, constraining influence of the Spirit" (291).

"The stress in #2_Timothy_3:16-17, which focuses on the second aspect of inspiration, is on God's sovereign action by the Holy Spirit in the human author, resulting in a God-breathed text. The passage's context is Paul's exhortation to Timothy, his younger pastor-apprentice, on living in the last days, between the first and second coming of Christ" (293).

"Scripture came to us through various modes; Some texts are given directly by God; others are the product of historical research and thoughtful interpretation. Scripture includes poetry, which required hard literary labor" (297).

### Generic Inspiration

 - <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Allison, Gregg. Sojourners and Strangers: The Doctrine of the Church. Wheaton, IL: Crossway: 2012.</mark>

"The church is logocentric--centered on Scripture, the inspired Word. Specifically, canonical Scripture is inspired, sufficient, necessary, truthful, clear, authoritative, and productive" (112).

"The inspiration of Scripture may be affirmed because the Holy Spirit superintends the biblical authors as they personally composed their writing, #2_Peter_1:19-21); thus, the writing of Scripture was a confluent or concussive process involving both the human authors, who constructed their narratives, psalms, letters, and other writing suing their grammatical abilities, choice of literary genre, and theological perspectives, and the Holy Spirit's particular guidance of them and their work" (13).

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.</mark>

"It is only in its written form that the Word of God is known in the world, and that His revelation is the continuous speech of God to man" (147).

"The Law and the historical books, the Psalms and the Prophets, the Gospels, and the Epistles were written under the guidance of the Holy Spirit, and are, therefore, all in the same measure holy. An appeal to any part of it is to the Word of God, and therefore to God Himself" (153).

"Scripture is in its entirety both the Word of God and the word of man" (153).

"If our doctrine of inspiration is concerned exclusively with the authoritative source, it will graduate toward a mechanical view. We cannot develop an adequate doctrine of inspiration from an abstract concept of this supernatural or original, independent of its content. Yet suppose it focuses exclusively on the having content (Jesus Christ). In that case, it is likely to yield a canon-within-a-canon approach, limiting inspiration to that explicitly preaches Christ" (Horton, The Christian Pilgrim, 2011: 157). So we must approach the doctrine of inspiration and Scripture from a position of trinitarian cooperation in inspiration, through [[2.04 The Principium Cognoscendi Internum|the principium cognoscendi internum]]

### Prophetic Inspiration

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.</mark>

"The nature of the prophet...there are two classical passages in the Bible, which shed light on the Biblical conception of a prophet, namely, and according to these passages, a prophet is simply the mouthpiece of God" (145).

### Apostolic Inspiration

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.</mark>

"The Holy Spirit came upon the prophets as a supernatural power and worked upon them from without. On the day of Pentecost, however, He took up His abode in the apostles' hearts and began to work upon them from within. He made their hearts His permanent abode" (146).

"Christ solemnly promised them the Holy Spirit in their teaching and preaching" (147).

## The Infallibility & Inerrancy of Scripture
 
 - <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Grudem, Wayne. Systematic Theology. Grand Rapids, MI: Zondervan Academic. 2020.</mark>

"It was argued further that the Bible teaches that God cannot lie or speak falsely #2_Samuel_7:28; #Titus_1:2; #Hebrews_6:18). Therefore, all the words in Scripture are claimed to be completely true and without error in any part #Numbers_23:19; #Psalm_126; #Psalm_119:89; #Proverbs_30:5; #Matthew_24:35). God's words are, in fact, the ultimate standard of truth (John 17:17)" (85).

"The words of the Lord are pure words, like silver refined in a furnace on the ground, purified seven times #Psalm_12:6) indicates the absolute reliability and purity of Scripture. Every word of God provides truth; he is the shield to those who take refuge in Him #Proverbs_30:5 indicates the truthfulness of every word that God has spoken" (85).

"The inerrancy of Scripture means that Scripture in the original manuscripts does not affirm anything contrary to fact" (85).

"The Bible repeatedly affirms that all of Scripture is profitable for us #2_Timothy_3:16 and that all of it was God-breathed. Thus it is completely pure #Psalm_12:6), perfect #Psalm_119:96, and true #Proverbs_30:5" (88).

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Wellum, Stephen. Systematic Theology Volume I. Brentwood, TN: B&H Academic Publishing, 2024.</mark>

"Inerrancy has been the hallmark of evangelical theology. In response to the classic liberalism of the modern age, evangelicals were known for their confession and defense of inerrancy, as reflected by the Chicago Statement of Biblical Inerrancy, and in the Southern Baptist Convention by the Baptist Faith and Message" (312).

"The term infallible (in the same sense of not liable to fail) remains useful as the broader term for biblical authority, with inerrancy a vital subject. Furthermore, we account for Scripture's diverse literary forms, and the specific truth claims each literary form makes" (313).

"Given what Scripture claims for itself, it is inerrant. As we look at the biblical claim through the eyes of Jesus and the apostles, they not only believed that the OT was God's unified revelation not fulfilled in Christ but also that even in its small details, to the jot and title, Scripture is true and accurate" (330).

## The Characteristics of Scripture

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Grudem, Wayne. Systematic Theology. Grand Rapids, MI: Zondervan Academic. 2020.</mark>

"The major teachings of the Bible about itself can be classified into four characteristics: (1) the authority of Scripture; (2) the clarity of Scripture; (3) the necessity of Scripture; and (4) the sufficiency of Scripture" (62).

### The Authority of Scripture

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.</mark>

"The divine authority of Scripture was generally accepted until the child winds of Rationalism swept over Europe and caused the enthusiasm of faith to go down to freezing point" (162).

Scripture exists in and by itself, that is, through Christ or the indwelling Spirit of God. Scripture owes its existence to the Church and is now further acknowledged, preserved, interpreted, and defined by it" (163).

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Gentry, Peter J, and Stephen J. Wellum. God's Kingdom through God's Covenant: A Concise Biblical Theology. Wheaton, IL: Crossway, 2015.</mark>

"A helpful way of describing the phenomena of Scripture is by viewing it as a word-act revelation. This means that Scripture is God's authoritative interpretation of his redemptive acts through the agency of human authors. God has disclosed himself in history through his mighty acts, what we often identify as Special Revelation in contrast to God's revelation in the natural world , General Revelation." (29).

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Grudem, Wayne. Systematic Theology. Grand Rapids, MI: Zondervan Academic. 2020.</mark>

"The authority of Scripture means that all the words in Scripture are God's words in such a way that to disbelieve or disobey any word of Scripture is to disbelieve or disobey God" (62).

"'Thus says the Lord' is to demonstrate that within the Old Testament we have written records of words that are claimed to be God's own words" (63).

"Our ultimate conviction that the words of the Bible are God's words comes only when the Holy Spirit speaks in and through the words of the Bible to our hearts and gives us an inner assurance that these are the words of our Creator speaking to us" (67).

"...the words of Scripture are the words of God, do not come apart from the words of Scripture or in addition to the words of Scripture. It is rather as people are reading Scripture that they hear their Creator's voice speaking to them in the words of Scripture and realize that the book they are reading is unlike any other book, that is indeed a book of God's own words speaking to their hearts" (67).

"The essence of the authority of Scripture is its ability to compel us to believe and to obey it and to make such belief and obedience equivalent to believing and obeying God himself" (72).

"In #John_17, Jesus prays to the Father, 'Sanctify them in truth; your word is truth (John 17:17). He uses a noun, aletheis (truth), to say that God's Word is not simply "true" but it is truth itself. To think of the Bible as being itself the final standard of truth. The Bible is God's Word, and God's Word is the ultimate definition of what is true and what is not true; God's Word is itself truth" (73).

"The final form in which Scripture remains is its written form. It was the words of God written on the tablets of stone that Moses deposited in the ark of the covenant" (75).
### The Clarity of Scripture

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Grudem, Wayne. Systematic Theology. Grand Rapids, MI: Zondervan Academic. 2020.</mark>

"We may define the clarity of Scripture as follows the clarity of Scripture means that the Bible is written in such a way that it can understood, but right understanding requires time, effort, the use of ordinary means, a willingness to obey, and the help of the Holy Spirit; and our understanding will remain imperfect in this lifetime" (109).

"Jesus blames the misunderstandings not on the Scriptures themselves but on those who misunderstand or fail to accept them" (111).

"Clarity is a property of Scripture, not a property of its readers. The clarity of Scripture affirms that Scripture can be understood rightly, not that it will always be understood rightly" (120).

"We might say, then, that we do understand Scripture because it can be understood, and we are always seeking to understand Scripture more fully because it can always be understood more fully. Both are implications of its clarity" (121).

### The Necessity of Scripture

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Gentry, Peter J, and Stephen J. Wellum. God's Kingdom through God's Covenant: A Concise Biblical Theology. Wheaton, IL: Crossway, 2015.</mark>

"In the New Testament, the gospel proclamation involves reciting God's acts in history" (29).

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Grudem, Wayne. Systematic Theology. Grand Rapids, MI: Zondervan Academic. 2020.</mark>

"The necessity of Scripture means that the Bible is necessary for knowing the gospel, for maintaining spiritual life, and for knowing God's will, but it is not necessary for knowing that God exists or for knowing something about God's character and moral law" (137).

"The Bible is necessary for salvation, then, in this sense: one must either read the gospel message in the Bible for oneself or hear it from another person. Even those believers who came to salvation in the old covenant did so by trusting God's words that promised a Savior to come" (139).

The Bible is necessary for:

1. Maintaining spiritual life

2. Certain knowledge of God's will

However, the Bible is not necessary for knowing that God exists. "People can obtain knowledge that God exists and the knowledge of some of these [[5.01 The Properties (or Attributes) of God|the attributes of God]] simply from observing themselves and the world around them" (144).

### The Sufficiency of Scripture

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Allison, Gregg. Sojourners and Strangers: The Doctrine of the Church. Wheaton, IL: Crossway: 2012.</mark>

"The sufficiency of Scripture means that Scripture contained all the words of God that he intended his people to have at each stage of redemptive history, and that it now contains all the words of God we need for salvation, for turning him perfectly, and for obeying him perfectly" (34).

"This sufficiency of Scripture is definitely circumscribed. It is not exhaustive of all matters in life, but it is exhaustive relative to its purpose: to lead non-Christians to faith in Jesus Christ so they may be saved, and to equip Christ-followers in the ways of godly living and the church in fruitful ministry" (113).

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Grudem, Wayne. Systematic Theology. Grand Rapids, MI: Zondervan Academic. 2020.</mark>

"The sufficiency of Scripture means that Scripture contains all the words of God we need for salvation, for trusting him perfectly, and for obeying him perfectly. This definition emphasizes that we are to search for God's words in Scripture alone. It also reminds us that God considers what he has told us in the Bible to be enough for us and that we should rejoice in the great revelation he has given us and be content with it" (152).

"The sufficiency of Scripture reminds us that we are to add nothing to Scripture and that we are to consider no other writings of equal value to Scripture" (157).

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Sproul, RC. Truths We Confess: A Systematic Exposition of the Westminster Confession of Faith. Orlando, FL: Reformation Trust, 2019.</mark>

The doctrine of Scripture "means that Scripture reveals what is necessary to know for salvation" (9).

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Waters, Guy Prentiss. For the Mouth of the Lord has Spoken: The Doctrine of Scripture. Glasgow, UK: Bell and Bain, 2001.</mark>

 "Everything that human beings need to glorify God; everything that God requires of people to believe and to do is found in Scripture. Scripture is the only rule of faith and obedience" (153).

"By the sufficiency of Scripture, then, we mean that Scripture contained all the words of God he intended his people to have at each stage of redemptive history, and that it now contains everything we need God to tell us for salvation, for trusting him perfectly, and for obeying him perfectly" (157).

 #2_Timothy_3:1-10: "Scripture occupies the sole and exclusive role as the norm of belief and life in the face of the spread of error within the church's bounds" (160).

#2_Peter_1:3-4: "Peter affirms a divinely provided sufficiency concerning life and godliness. This sufficiency is expressly joined to the knowledge of God and the precious and very great promises He has given us" (161).

 "Scripture is clear, to the degree that it is clear, both to the learned and the unlearned" (205).
 
- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Wellum, Stephen. Systematic Theology Volume I. Brentwood, TN: B&H Academic Publishing, 2024.</mark>

"Scripture is sufficient because God's word to his people is precisely what God wants us to know to be in a covenant relationship with him. For all things necessary to know and glorify God and to experience redemption in Christ, Scripture is enough" (336).

"To affirm the sufficiency and clarity of the Bible is to affirm what Scripture claims for itself and the triune God who gave it. God's word is sufficient to know Him and to live for His glory as His people, which also requires a clear understanding. Divine authority demands an understandable word since God creates obligations in its hearers; obligations to believe what it says, to do what it commands, to write it on our hearts, and so on" (337).

"Scripture is enough to lead us to salvation in Christ, and it is enough for life and godliness: teaching, rebuking, correcting, training in righteousness, so that Timothy as the man of God and by extension all Christians may be complete, equipped for every good work #1_Peter_3:16. Scripture is all Timothy needs to discharge his duties" (339-40).

