Principium Cognoscendi Internum = internal principle of knowing, which is the subjective, internal capacity by which humans can understand divine truth. It is contrasted with [[2.02 The Principium Cognoscendi Externum (Revelation)|Revelation]], which is the external principles of learning, which is Scripture.

- Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.

"The knowledge of God presupposes, not only that God has revealed Himself, but also that man is capable, either constitutionally or by a gracious work of renewal, of receiving and appropriating this revelation. All knowledge, and consequently all science, requires a certain correspondence between subject and object. This means that alongside the Principium Cognoscendi Externum (Revelation), there must also be a Principium Cognoscendi Internum, a principium in man which enables him to discern and to appropriate God's Special Revelation" (170).

"Revelation simply is not revelation until it is brought home to the heart of man in faith" (170).

- DeYoung, Kevin. Daily Doctrine. Wheaton, IL: Crossway, 2025.

"The only way we can know a transcendent God is for God to make himself known. In general revelation, God reveals Himself through the works of creation and providence. The heavens declare the glory of God, and the sky above proclaims his handiwork #Psalm_19:1)" (23).

- Horton, Michael. The Christian Faith: A Systematic Theology for Pilgrims On the Way. Grand Rapids, MI: Zondervan Publishing, 2011.

"So Scripture is the church's authoritative canon because it comes from the Father. Thus says the Lord, ought to be held as a first principle (primum principium) into which all true theology is resolved" (156).

- Parsons, Burk, editor. Table Talk Magazine: Death. Sanford, FL: Ligonier Ministries, 2025.

"Because of the fundamental, qualitative difference between God and humanity, people cannot know or find their way to the Creator without divine assistance. In other words, the Lord must speak to us in a way that we can understand if we are to know and enjoy a blessed relationship with Him. General Revelation, also called natural theology, consists of what God has revealed about himself to all people in and through the things He has created" (34).

- Wellum, Stephen. Systematic Theology Volume I. Brentwood, TN: B&H Academic Publishing, 2024.

"Natural revelation results in a true but limited knowledge of God, the self, and the world" (208)."

"Natural revelation is not the same thing as natural theology. Natural theology consists of discursive arguments that demonstrate that the observation of the world rationally warrants God's existence and nature. Natural Revelation is God's revelation of himself and his moral will in creation and humans, which results in a true knowledge that leaves all people without excuse" (214).

