- Bavinck, Herman. Reformed Dogmatics: Abridged in One Volume. Grand Rapids, MI: Baker Academic, 2011.

"In connection with the [[14.01 General and Special Operation of the Holy Spirit|General and Special Operations of the Holy Spirit]], the subject of common grace also calls for attention.

"All this is summed up in the word grace, which denotes the unmerited favor of God and the many benefits flowing from it; the gifts of grace #Romans_5:20; #Ephesians_1:7; #Ephesians_2:5; #Philippians_1:2; #Colossians_1:2; #Titus_2:11; #Titus_3:7)" (497).

"Grace, like sin, is never a substance and does not elevate us beyond nature but rather frees us from the enslavement of sin within our natural order; the physical opposition between the natural and the supernatural yields to the ethical opposition between sin and grace" (496-97).

## Origin of the Doctrine of Common Grace

- Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.

"The doctrine of common grace was occasioned by the fact that there is in the world, alongside of the course of the Christian life with all its blessings, a natural course of life, which is not redemptive and yet exhibits many traces of the true, the good, and the beautiful" (444).

"Augustine spoke of a grace which Adam enjoyed before the fall, and even admitted that man's existing as a living, sentient, and rational being might be termed grace. But over against Pelagius, who stressed the natural ability of man and recognized no other grace than that consisting in the natural endowments of man, the law and the gospel, the example of Christ, and the illumination of the understanding by a gracious influence of God, he emphasized the total inability of man and his absolute dependence on the grace of God as an inner renewing power, which not only illumines the mind but also acts directly on the will of man, either as operating or as co-operating grace" (445).

"The heaven can perform certain acts which are in themselves good and from a lower point of view even praiseworthy, but yet considers these deeds, as the deeds of unregenerate persons, to be sin, because they do not spring from the motive of love to God or of faith, and do not answer to the right purpose, the glory of God" (445).

## Names and Concept of Common Grace

- Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.

Common grace can be attributed to discussions with John Calvin. Calins speaks under thread heads, namely:

1. Universal Common Grace: a grace that extends to all creatures.
2. General Common Grace: that is a grace which applies to mankind in general and to every member of the human race
3. Covenant Common Grace: a grace that is common to all those who live in the sphere of the covenant, whether they belong to the elect or not.

Ordinary versus Common?

From the Westminster Larger Catechism defines common grace as: "the grace thus bestowed is common, not in the sense of being given to all men in common, but in the sense of producing effects which are ordinary, and may fall short of a real saving efficacy. "So understood, the grace of God may be common without being general or universal" (447).

"When we speak of common grace, we have in mind, either (a) those general operations of the Holy Spirit whereby He, without renewing the heart, exercises such a moral influence on man through His general or special revelation, that sin is restrained, order is maintained in social life, and civil righteousness is promoted; or (b) those general blessings, such as rain and sunshine, food and drink, clothing and shelter, which God imparts to all men indiscriminately where and in what measure it seems good to Him" (448).

The decree of election determines the extent of special grace. This grace is limited to the elect, while common grace is not so limited, but is granted to all men indiscriminately. The decree of [[7.02 Predestination|election]] and reprobation has no determining influence on it.

"Special grace removes the guilt and penalty of sin, changes the inner life of man, and gradually cleanses him from the pollution of sin by the supernatural operation of the Holy Spirit. IT works invariably in the salvation of the sinner. Common grace, on the other hand, never removes the guilt of sin, does not renew human nature, but only has a restraining effect on the corrupting influences of sin and, in a measure, mitigates its results" (449).

- Special grace is irresistible.
- Special grace works in a spiritual and transformative way, renewing the entire nature of man, and thus making man able and willing to accept the offer of salvation in Jesus Christ and to produce spiritual fruits.

## Common Grace and the Atoning Work of Christ

"According to him, Christ as the Mediator of creation, the light that lightest every man coming into the world, is the source of common grace. This means that the blessings of standard grace flow from the work of creation.

## The Relation between Special and Common Grace

- Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.

"Special grace is supernatural and spiritual: it removes the guilt and pollution of sin and lifts the sentence of condemnation. Common grace, on the other hand, is natural; and while some of its forms may be closely connected with saving grace, it does not remove sin nor set man free, but merely restrains the outward manifestations of sin and promotes outward morality and decency, good order in society and civic righteousness, the development of science and arts, and so on" (451).

"No amount of common grace can ever introduce the sinner into the new life that is in Christ Jesus. However, common grace does sometimes reveal itself in forms that man can hardly distinguish from the manifestations of [[14.03 Special Grace | special grace]]  as, for instance, in the case of temporal faith" (452).

## How Common Grace Operates

- Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.

"God by his providence, curbs the perverseness of nature, preventing it from breaking forth into action, yet without rendering it inwardly pure" (453).

"According to #Romans_13, governments are ordinances of God, to maintain good order in society. To resist them is to resist the ordinance of God" (453). See the [Belgic Confession](https://www.crcna.org/welcome/beliefs/confessions/belgic-confession).

### The Fruits of Common Grace

- Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.

"God pronounced the sentence of death on the sinner. Speaking of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, He said in the day that he ate thereof thou shalt surely die. Man did eat of it, and the sentence went into execution to a certain extent, but was clearly not fully executed at once. IT is due to common grace that God did not at once fully execute the sentence of death on the sinner and does not do so now, but maintains and prolongs the natural life of man and gives him time for repentance. That God acts on this principle is abundantly evident from such passages as #Isaiah_48:9, #Jeremiah_7:22-25; #Luke_13:6-9; #Romans_2:4; #Romans_9:22; #2_Peter_3:9" (454).

Through the operations of the common grace, sin is restrained in the lives of individuals and in society.

"It is due to common grace that man still retains some sense of the true, the good, and the beautiful, often appreciates these to a rather surprising degree, and reveals a desire for truth, for external morality, and even for certain forms of religion" (455).