- Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.

"The sinner cannot share in the saving benefits of Christ's redemptive work unless he is in union with Him, and thus emphasizes a fundamental truth. As Adam was the representative head of the old humanity, so Christ is the representative of the new humanity" (461).

"In the counsel of peace Christ voluntarily took upon Himself to be the Head and Surety of the elect, destined to constitute the new humanity, and as such to establish their righteousness before God by paying the penalty for their sin and by rendering perfect obedience to the law and thus securing their title to everlasting life" (462).

"In the case of the first Adam, there was not only a federal, but also a natural and organic union between him and his descendants. There was the tie of a common life between him and all his progeny, and this made it possible that the blessings of the covenant of works, if these had eventuated, could have been passed on the whole organism of humanity in an organic way" (462).

The characteristics of the mystical union:

1. It is an organic union. Christ and the believers form one body #John_15:5; #1_Corinthians_6:15-19; #Ephesians_1:22, #Ephesians_4:15; #Ephesians_5:29)
2. It is a vital union. Christ is the vitalizing and dominating principle of the whole body of believers.
3. It is a union mediated by the Holy Spirit. The Holy Spirit was, in a special capacity, a part of the Mediator's reward, and as such, was poured out on the day of Pentecost for the formation of the spiritual body of Jesus Christ.
4. It is a union that implies reciprocal action.
5. It is a personal union.
6. It is a transforming union.

"The sinner has nothing in himself and receives everything freely from Christ, must be reflected in the consciousness of the sinner" (466).

- DeMarest, Bruce. *The Cross and Salvation: The Doctrine of Salvation*. Crossway, Wheaton, IL: 1997.

"interpret union with Christ not as a discrete step in the ordo salutis but as a comprehensive concept that embraces the whole scope of salvation from eternity past to eternity future" (319).

the elect are united with Christ, the second Adam, by virtue of his federal headship under the covenant of grace (312).

Scripture describes the saints as predestined in Christ, #Ephesians_1:4-5, called in Christ, #2_Timothy_1:9, regenerated in Christ, #Ephesians_2:10, justified in Christ, #Romans_8:1, sanctified in Christ, #1_Corinthians_1:4-5, and glorified in Christ, #Romans_8:17 (319).

Interpret union with Christ not as a discrete step in the ordo salutis but as a comprehesive concept that embraces the whole scope of salvation from eternity past to eternity present (319).

The elect are united with Christ, the second Adam, by virtue of his fedeal headship under the covenant of grace. Scripture de

- DeYoung, Kevin. Daily Doctrine. Wheaton, IL: Crossway, 2025.

"The doctrine of union with Christ is so common in the New Testament that we can easily miss it. Over two hundred times in Paul's letter and more than two dozen times in John's writing, we see expressions such as "in Christ," "in the Lord," or "in him." We are found in Christ #Philippians_3:9, preserved in Christ #Romans_8:39, saved and sanctified in Christ #1_Corinthians_1:30; #2_Timothy_1:9). We walk in Christ #Colossians_2:6, labor in Christ #1_Corinthians_15:58, and obey in Christ #Ephesians_6:1. We die in Christ (Revelations 14:13), live in Christ #Galatians_2:20, and conquer in Christ #Romans_8:37" (259).

- Ferguson, Sinclair. The Holy Spirit: Contours of Christian Theology. Downers Grove, IL: InterVarsity Press, 1996.

 "The central role of the Spirit is to reveal Christ and to unite us to him and to all those who participate in his body. Just as the indwelling of Christ and the indwelling of the Spirit are two aspects of the same reality in the New Testament, so too sustain us in Christ is the heart and soul of the Spirit's ministry" (100).

## Calling in General and External Calling

- Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.

The question of the relative order of calling and regeneration has been frequently discussed, and the discussion has often suffered from a lack of discrimination, resulting in a misunderstanding. The terms "calling" and "regeneration" were not always used in the same sense.  So we shall briefly consider (1) the representations found in Scripture and in our standards: (2) the order generally followed by Reformed theologians, and (3) the reasons that may be advanced in favor of a discussion of the external calling through the Word and preceding both regeneration and internal calling (469).

#Ezekiel_37:1-14: This passage refers to other civil restoration and the spiritual revival of the house of Israel, and probably also contains a hint respecting the resurrection of its dead.

- DeYoung, Kevin. Daily Doctrine. Wheaton, IL: Crossway, 2025.

"General calling refers to the free offer of the gospel announced to all sinners, both elect and non-elect. This calling is general instead of effectual, external instead of internal, visible instead of invisible" (240),

### Calling in General

- Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.

"External calling is but an aspect of calling in general; we shall have to consider this briefly before entering upon discussion of external calling:

1. The author of our calling. Our calling is a work of the [[6.02 God as Trinity in Unity|Triune God]]. It is the first of all a work of the Father #1_Corinthians_1:9; #1_Thessalonians_2:12; #1_Peter_5:10. The Father works all things through the Son, and so this calling is also ascribed to the Son.
2. Vocatio Realis and Verbalis. Generally speaking, of vocatio realis, as distinguished from the vocatio verbalis. This means the external call that comes to men through God's general revelation, a revelation of the law and not of the gospel, to acknowledge, fear, and honor God as their Creator. It comes to them in things rather than in words: in nature and history, in the environment in which they live, and in the experiences and vicissitudes of their lives #Psalm_19:1-4; #Acts_16:16; #Acts_17:27; #Romans_1:19-21; #Romans_2:14.
3. Different conceptions of the vocatio verbalis. This term suggests the divine call that comes to man through the preaching of the Word of God (472-74).

- Ferguson, Sinclair. The Holy Spirit: Contours of Christian Theology. Downers Grove, IL: InterVarsity Press, 1996.

"The blessing of salvation becomes ours through the Spirit, exclusively, immediately, simultaneously, and eschatologically in Christ. In Pauline terms, it is only in him that the blessings of redemption become ours, and it is only by the Spirit that we are in Christ. But in Christ all spiritual blessings are ours here and now #Ephesians_1:3" (102).

###  External Calling

- Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.

The Bible does not use the term "external" but speaks of a calling that is not efficacious.

The elements comprised in it:

1. A presentation of the gospel facts and of the doctrine of redemption.
2. "The way of redemption revealed in Christ must be set forth clearly in all its relations. God's plan of redemption, the saving work of Christ, and the renewing and transforming operations of the Holy Spirit, should all be interpreted in their mutual relations" (475).
3. An invitation to accept Christ in repentance and faith.
4. A promise of forgiveness and salvation.

The Characteristics of External Calling:

- It is general or universal.
- It is a bona fide calling. The external calling is a calling in good faith, a calling that is seriously meant. When God calls the sinner to accept Christ by faith, He earnestly desires this, and when He promises those who repent and believe eternal life, His promise is dependable.

- DeYoung, Kevin. Daily Doctrine. Wheaton, IL: Crossway, 2025.

"Effectual calling is the initial act of salvific application whereby we are joined to Christ and made sharers in all his benefits. Effectual calling does not just make our embrace of Chris possible, it makes it certain" (241).

## Regeneration and Effectual Calling

Regeneration = Matthew 19:28

### The Use of the Term Regeneration in Theology

- Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.

 In the early church, the concept of regeneration was not hotly debated. But it was used "to denote a change closely connected with the washing away of sins, and no clear distinction was made between regeneration and justification" (482).

### The Essential Nature of Regeneration

- Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.

"Relative to the nature of regeneration, there are several misconfigurations that should be avoided.

1. Misconceptions: (a) Regeneration is not a change in the substance of human nature, as was taught by the Manichaeans and in the days of the Reformation, which conceived of original sin as a substance to be replaced by another substance in regeneration. (b) Neither is it simply a change in one or more of the faculties of the soul, as, for instance, of the emotional life, by removing the aversion to divine things, as some evangelicals conceive of it; nor of the intellect, by illuminating the mind that is darkened by sin. (c) Nor is it a complete or perfect change of the whole nature of man, or of any part of it, so that it is no more capable of sin, as was taught by the Anabaptists and by some other fanatical sects" (484).
2. Positive Characteristics of Regeneration

3. Regeneration consists of implanting the principle of the new spiritual life in man. Give birth to life #1_Corinthians_2:14; #2_Corinthians_4:6; #Ephesians_1:18, #Colossians_3:10; #Psalm_110:3; #Philippians_2:13; #2_Thessalonians_3:5; #Hebrews_13:21).
4. It is an instantaneous change of man's nature, affecting at once the whole man, intellectually, emotionally, and morally.
5. It is, in its most limited sense, a change that occurs in the subconscious life.

6. Definition of Regeneration: is that act of God by which the principle of the new life is implanted in man, and the governing disposition of the soul is made holy.

### Effectual Calling in Relation to External Calling

## The Necessity of Regeneration

- Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.

"The necessity of regeneration, as the Christian Church understands this, is naturally denied in modern liberal theology. It is not in accord with the teaching of Rousseau that man is by nature good. Any radical change or complete turnabout in the life of an essentially good man would be a change for the worse. Holiness or conformity to the divine law is the indispensable condition of securing divine favor, attaining peace of conscience, and enjoying fellowship with God #Hebrews_12:14. Man is described as dead through trespasses and sin #Ephesians_2:1, and this condition calls for nothing less than a restoration to life" (489).

"Scripture does not leave us in doubt about the necessity of regeneration, but asserts this in the clearest terms #John_3:3). This statement of the Savior is absolute and leaves no room for exceptions" (489).

- Ferguson, Sinclair. The Holy Spirit: Contours of Christian Theology. Downers Grove, IL: InterVarsity Press, 1996.

"Union to Christ is inaugurated by the renewing work of the Spirit in which he begins the transformation into the image of Christ, which will be completed at the eschaton" (116).

"The divine monergism behind it is spelled out elsewhere in antitheses: we are born, not of our won will but of God's decision #John_1:12; from above, not from below; of the Spirit, not of the flesh of God, not of man #1_John_2:29; #1_John_3:9; #1_John_4:7; #1_John_5:1 by God's choice, not our own; through his word, not out of the energies of an autonomous will #James_1:18). The priority here is accorded to God, not to man" (119).

"The Spirit's work in regeneration is thus total in the extent of its transforming power. It is the individual, as an individual, who is regenerated, the whole person. Regeneration reverses that depravity, and is universal in the sense that, while the regenerate individual is not yet as holy as they might be, there is no part of life which remains uninfluenced by this renewing and cleansing work" (122-23).

"Men are under the covenant of Judgment of God for their rejection of the obligations of faith and obedience #Amos_4:6-11). Repentance involves a recognition of this: a realization of the significance of being in the far country separated from the Father" (133).

- Owen, John. *The Holy Spirit*. Banner of Truth Trust: Puritan Paperback, Carlisle, PA: 1998

"Regeneration is not merely being[[18.02 Christian Baptism | baptized]] and saying, I have repented. The water in baptism is only the outward sign, #1_Peter_3:21. If baptism with a confession of [[15.03 Faith|repentance]] is regeneration, then all who are baptized and say they have repented must be regenerated. But plainly this is not so, #Acts_8:13:21-23" (55).