- Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.

"The priestly work of the [[13.01 The Offices of Christ|offices of Christ]] is not limited to the sacrificial offering of Himself on the cross, the [[13.02 The Atonement of Christ|atonement of Christ]]. It is sometimes said that, while Christ was a *priest* on earth, He is a King in heaven. This creates the impression that His priestly work is finished, which is by no means correct" (409).

The term *parakletos* is applied to Christ. The word is found only in #John_14:16, 26; #John_15:16, #John_26:7 and #1_John_2:1. It is rendered "comforter" wherever it is found in the Gospel of John, but the advocate is the single passage in which it is found in the First Epistle of John. The word denotes one who is called in for aid, an advocate, one who pleads the cause of another and also gives him wise counsel" (410).

"Christ as our advocate pleads the believer's cause with the Father against Satan, the accuser #Zechariah_3:1; #Hebrews_7:25; #1_John_2:1; #Revelations_12:10), while the Holy Spirit not only pleads the cause of Christ with the believers and serves them with wise counsel #John_14:26; #John_15:26; #John_16:14)" (410).

"[[13.02 The Atonement of Christ|The Atonement of Christ]] cannot be dissociated from his intercessory work. It is but the continuation of the [[13.01 The Offices of Christ|offices of Christ]], carrying the office of Priest to completion" (410).

"Not only does the intercessory work of Christ bear on our judicial state; it also relates to our moral condition, our gradual sanctification" (412).

- Saint Augustine. *City of God*. Translated by Henry Bettenson. London, England: Penguin Books, 2003. 

We need a mediator, since there can be no direct meeting between the immortal purity on high and the mortal and unclean things below. But our need is not for a mediator with an immortal body, like the bodies on high, but with a diseased soul, like those below for that disease would make him envious of our possible cure, and by no means redy to assist us toward health (364)