- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.</mark>

"It has become customary to speak of three offices in connection with the work of Christ, namely the prophetical, the priestly, and the kingly office. While some of the early Christian fathers already spoke of the different offices of Christ, John Calvin was the first to recognize the importance of distinguishing the three offices of the Mediator and to call attention to" (362).

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">DeMarest, Bruce. *The Cross and Salvation: The Doctrine of Salvation*. Crossway, Wheaton, IL: 1997.</mark>

Prophet was a servant who received messages from God and then communicated them faithfully to the people. The words of the coming prophet must be heard and obeyed, #Deuteronomy_18:15-19, #Acts_3:22, #Isaiah_61:1-2, went beyond the son of Amoz to portray the prophetic ministry of the Messiah (183).

Priest appointed from the tribe of Levi and the family of Aaron, guarded the covenant, taught God's law, and offered sacrifices, #Deuteronomy_33:-8-10, #Leviticus_10:11, #2_Chronicles_17:9 (183).

The king exercised executive, legislative, judicial, and military powers essential to governing the nation (185).

- Wellum, Stephen. *The 5 Solas Series: Christ Alone: The Uniqueness of Jesus as Savior*, Grand Rapids, MI: Zondervan, 2017.

 The sufficiency of Christ as our prophet, priest, and king--a biblical truth which was developed by John Calvin and the heirs of the Reformation (127).

Christ as prophet, priest, and king allows us to highlight the essentials of what he has accomplished and integrate the major aspects of his work (129).

## The Prophetic Office

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.</mark>

The Old Testament uses three words to designate a prophet, namely *nabhi, ro'eh,* and *chozeh*. The words "ro'3h" and "chozeh" emphasize that the prophet receives revelations from God, particularly in the form of visions. These works are used interchangeably (364).

The prophet speaks forth from God. From these names, taken together, we gather that a prophet sees things, that is, who receives revelations, who is in the service of God, particularly as a messenger, who speaks in HIs name.

#Exodus_7:1 and #Deuteronomy_18:18 indicate that there are two elements in the prophetic function, the one passive and the other active, the one receptive and the other productive. The prophet receives divine revelation in dreams, visions, or verbal communications and passes it on to the people, either orally or visibly through prophetic actions #Numbers_12:6-8; #Isaiah_6; #Jeremiah_1:4-10; #Ezekiel_3:1-4).

The prophet must reveal God's will to the people.

Proofs from Scripture: He is foretold as a prophet in #Deuteronomy_18:15; a passage that is applied to Christ in #Acts_3:22. He speaks of Himself as a prophet in #Luke_13:33. He claims to bring a message from the Father #John_8:26-28; #John_12:39; #John_14:10; #John_15:15; #John_17:8). He speaks with #Matthew_7:9 and his mighty works served to authenticate His message #Matthew_21:11; #Luke_7:16; #Luke_24:19; #John_3:2; #John_4:19; #John_6:14; #John_7:40.

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">DeYoung, Kevin. Daily Doctrine. Wheaton, IL: Crossway, 2025.</mark>

"The prophetic office combined a passive and active function. Passively, the prophet received divine revelation. He actively revealed to others what God had given him. The prophet's role was broad: he warned and admonished, he comforted and encouraged, he rebuked, he called for repentance, he comforted and encouraged, he rebuked, he gave assurance of grace, he made known God's will, he announced God's commands, he spoke of coming blessing and threatened coming judgment" (211).

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Wellum, Stephen. *The 5 Solas Series: Christ Alone: The Uniqueness of Jesus as Savior*, Grand Rapids, MI: Zondervan, 2017.</mark>

 The prophet is a man of God who speaks God's word to the people. Since God is the source and standard of truth, his people need to hear his word. The words of the prophet, then, function to guide God's people in his ways for living in the world, under his covenant blessings, and ultimately for the glory of his name (130). 
 
We need a prophet because as finite creatures we do not know objective, universal truth in a warranted way apart from God's revelation, both in nature and primarily in Scripture (131).
## The Priestly Office

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Bavinck, Herman. Reformed Dogmatics: Abridged in One Volume. Grand Rapids, MI: Baker Academic, 2011.</mark>

"A special class of priests--holy persons who effect and maintain communion with God--also gradually arose in all religions to offer sacrifices and serve as mediators. Having lost their priestly roles, human beings felt a need for special persons to take their place and plead their case before God" (424).

Jesus offered a perfect sacrifice for sin. This was a completed and final sacrifice, never to be repeated, a theme frequently emphasized in the book of #Hebrews_7:27; #Hebrews_9:12; #Hebrews_10:1-2, 10, 12, 14; #Hewbrew_13:12.

-<mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;"> Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.</mark>

"The Bible makes a broad but important distinction between a prophet and a priest. Both receive their appointment from God #Deuteronomy_18:18; #Hebrews_5:4. But the prophet was appointed to be God's representative with the people, to be His messenger, and to interpret His will. He was primarily a religious teacher. The priest, on the other hand, was man's representative with God" (367).

See #Hebrews_5:1: "the priest is taken from among men to be their representatives; God appoints him and he is active in the interest of men in things that pertain to God, that is, in religious things, his special work is to offer gifts and sacrifice for sins. But the work of the priest included even more than that. He also made intercession for the people #Hebrews_7:25 and blessed them in the name of God #Leviticus_9:22" (367).

Christ's priestly work is twofold. "His foremost task was to offer an all-sufficient sacrifice for the sin of the world. It belonged to the office of priest that he should offer gifts and sacrifices for sin" (368).

Christ's sacrifices and the priestly office are typological in nature. There are other views, however:

1. The gift theory: sacrifices were presented to establish good relations.

2. The sacramental-communion theory is a totemistic idea that reverences an animal, which was supposed to share in the divine nature.

3. The homage theory: where sacrifices were an expression of homage and dependence.

"The sacrificial work of Christ was symbolized and typified in the Mosaic sacrifices. Their expiatory and vicarious natures. They were gifts to please God, to express gratitude to Him, or to placate His wrath, and they were essentially sacrificial meals symbolizing communion between Man and God. The Mosaic sacrifices had not only ceremonial and symbolical, but also spiritual and typical significance" (373-75).

For a more in-depth discussion of the [[13.03 The Intercessory Work of Christ|atonement of Christ]], which is a fundamental part of His priestly office.

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">DeYoung, Kevin. Daily Doctrine. Wheaton, IL: Crossway, 2025.</mark>

"Christ's work as priest chiefly consists of two things: atonement and intercession. The nature of Christ's ongoing intercession is manifold. Christ not only prays for us; his perpetual presence in heaven is itself part of his mediatorial work #Hebrews_7:25; #Hebrews_8:1-4: #Hebrews_9:24)" (212).

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Wellum, Stephen. *The 5 Solas Series: Christ Alone: The Uniqueness of Jesus as Savior*, Grand Rapids, MI: Zondervan, 2017.</mark>

The priest was a carefully chosen individual who came from among the covenant people of Israel. This select group was chosen to represent a particular people before GOd, namely, all those under the old covenant (137).

The NT is clear that Christ not only fulfills the OT priests and their mediation, but he also transcends that work by inaugurating a new and better priesthood (141-42).

Christ is called and appointed to fulfill the office of priest based on his inherent divine Sonship and his perfect obedience as a man (142).

Christ represents a new humanity created in himself as God the Son incarnate (142).

Christ offers himslef as the perfect sacrifice that atones for all the sins of his people, once for all and forever, #Hebrews_7:25-27; #Hebrews_9:12; #Hebrews_10:15-18. As such, Christ is able to save compltely those who come to God through him (142). 

Christ applies how own precious blood to bring the new humanity in himself into the presence of God himself, securing an eternal--establishes a strong causal relationship between the achivement of Christ's priestly work and the effects of that work in his new covenant people. Jesus' priestly work achieves and applies new covenant realitieis to all those in the covennat (142-43). 

Christ provides a unified and perfect work of covenantal mediation--a perfection of work established by the perfection of his person and etenral life as God the Son incarnate (143).

As our great high priest, Christ wins the full forgiveness of sins by his perfect sacrifice. And as our King, Christ inaugurates God's kingdom in this world by his incarnation, cross, resurrection, and ascenion (157). 

Jesus views the purpose of his deaht as priestly sacrifice that inaugurates the promised new covenant in blood, #Luke_22:20 (202).

## The Kingly Office

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.</mark>

"As the Second Person in the triune God, the eternal Son, Christ, naturally shares the dominion of God over [[7.03 Creation|Creation]], His throne is established in heaven and His kingdom ruleth over all #Psalm_103:19)" (415).

"The spiritual nature of this kingship is indicated, among others, by the fact that Christ is repeatedly called the Head of the Church #Ephesians_1:22; #Ephesians_4:15; #Ephesians_5:23; #Colossians_1:18; #Colossians_2:19. This term, as applied to Christ, is in some cases practically equivalent to King as in #1_Corinthians_11:3; #Ephesians_1:22; #Ephesians_5:23: however, it is used in a literal and organize essence #Ephesians_4:15; #Colossians_1:18; #Colossians_2:19" (415).

The kingdom has the following characteristics:

- It is grounded in the work of redemption.
- It is a spiritual Kingdom.
- It is a kingdom that is both present and future.
- It is closely related to the Church, though not altogether identical with it.

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Wellum, Stephen. *The 5 Solas Series: Christ Alone: The Uniqueness of Jesus as Savior*, Grand Rapids, MI: Zondervan, 2017.</mark>

A king in Scripture is tied to our image-bearing role of ruling over the world, #Genesis_1:26-31 and #Psalm_8. 

In the OT, the ultimate expression of kingship is foudn in David and his sons, who are to bring God's rule and reign to to this world, and to put everyting under their feet, #2_Samual_7:18-21, #Psalm_2:8. Yet in the OT, starting with Adam and continuing through the Davididc kings, there is sin and fialrue, which ultimately leads to the prophetic anticipation ofthe coming of a greater David--one who is human but also identified with the Lord (145).

Before God, our sin resutls in a verdict of condmentation, #Romans_5:12, #Romans_5:15-19, #Romans_8:1; it leaves us defiled, #Isaiah_6:3-5; it results in spiritual and physical death, #Genesis_2:18; #Genesis_5:5; #Romans_6:23, and ultimatley, it leaves us helpless and powerless (146).