- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Bavinck, Herman. Reformed Dogmatics: Abridged in One Volume. Grand Rapids, MI: Baker Academic, 2011.</mark>

"It is God himself who brings about reconciliation in Christ #2_Corinthians_5:19. By Christ's sacrifice, a new relation of reconciliation and peace has been accomplished between God and humanity. The benefit of this work of Christ is unrestricted; it covers every dimension of experience; it extends to all creation" (459).

1. Christ's work of atonement is an aspect of his priestly work.
2. Christ's work of atonement is primarily objective and only secondarily subjective.
3. The atonement is based on the active and passive obedience of Christ.
4. The motivation for the atonement is not one thing but many things.
5. Christ's work of atonement is at the heart of the gospel and the minimum of the apostolic message of salvation.

There are two ways in which the atonement can be theorized:

1. Recapitulation (Irenaeus) - Christ lived out all the stages of human life in such a way that his life of obedience compensated for Adam's life of disobedience.
2. Ransom to Satan (Origen) - Christ's death is seen as a ransom to purchase man's freedom.
3. Commercial (Anselm) - Christ's death brought infinite honor to God. God gave Christ a reward, which He passed on to man in the form of forgiveness and eternal life.
4. Moral influences (Abelard) - Christ's death showed God's great love, which in turn gave man the impetus to repent and believe.
5. Example (Socinus) - Christ's death was an example of obedience and piety that can inspire man to the same virtues.
6. Government (Grotius) - Christ's death demonstrates that the law must be upheld and sin must be punished. His death is not a vicarious sacrifice but a way for God to maintain his moral governance of the universe.
7. Mystical theory (Schleiermacher) - like the moral influence, this mode is meant to effect a change in man. This theory argues that a change was wrought in man deep in his subconsciousness.
8. Vicarious Repentance (Campbell) - Christ's identification with us. Christ lived a life of self-sacrifice, identified with us by suffering on the cross, and repented on our behalf, thereby leading God to be merciful to sinners.
9. Elect and effective (Barth) - since Christ assumed human nature, his death must have been intended for all those with that nature.
10. Penal Substitution (Protestant Reformers) - emphasized by Calvin and Luther, but traces can also be found in Martyr and Tertullian. Christ's death was a substitutionary sacrifice meant to satisfy the demands of God's justice.

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.</mark>

"The great and central part of the [[13.01 The Offices of Christ|Office of Christ]] is that of Priest. This lies in the atonement, but this is not complete with the [[13.03 The Intercessory Work of Christ|Intercessory Work of Christ]]. His sacrificial work on earth called for His service in the heavenly sanctuary" (374).

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">DeMarest, Bruce. *The Cross and Salvation: The Doctrine of Salvation*. Crossway, Wheaton, IL: 1997.</mark>

"Thus all are guilty before the bar of divine justice, #Genesis_3:7, #Isaiah_1:4, #Jeremiah_2:22, in a state of condemnation, #Romans_3:19; #Romans_5:15, and holistically depraved, #John_3:6, #Romans_8:5-8, #Colossians_2:13. In God's justice the certain consequences of sin and depravity are physical death, #Romans_5:12, #Romans_8:10; #1_John_5:16-17, spiritual death or estrangement from God, #Genesis_3:8-10, #Isaiah_59:2, #Ephesians_5:14, #Colossians_1:21, and eternal death or everlasting punishment, #Matthew_25:41, #Matthew_46:2, #2_Thessalonians_1:9, #Revelation_20:13-15, at the hands of an angry God" (148).

If only God can make this satisfaction, and only a man ought to make it: God-man must make it (152).

Karl Barth affirmed that Christ in his death objectively reconciled the world to God. He takes human beings into unity with His own. Thus in solidarity with Christ at Calvary humankind suffered and died. On the cross, the punishment of God fell on him and on us (157).

God eternally elected himself in Jesus Christ for suffering and death. In this respect, the cross signifies the rejection of the Son of God (157).

Christ offered Himself as a sacrifice for our sins, following the example of Isaac (159).

Christ offered the sacrifice on behalf of all, surrendering his own temple to death in place of all, to settle man's account with death and free him from the primal transgression. Christ's death was a penal satisfaction for the divine sentence of death (159).

Original sin brought humanity under the sentence of condemnation and death. Christ bore for our sakes sin in the sense of death as brought on human nature by sin. This is what hung on the tree...thus was death condemned that the reign might cease and accursed that it might be destroyed. Christ's penal sacrifice, furthermore, delivers saints from satanic bondages, cleanses sins, reconciles to the Father, and offers the church an example of humility, patience in suffering, and faith in God (160).

Luther taught that through his life and death, Christ bore the sin, guilt, and punishment of a condemned race. As a result of his propitiatory sacrifice, Christ frees trusting souls from the curse of the law, imparts perfect righteousness, reconciles God and sinners, and conquers sin, death, and the Devil. Luther summed up his position thusly, On your sinful person, he (Christ) bore your sin, death, and curse (160).

Through his substitutionary sacrifice, Christ satisfied the demands of a just God and appeased the divine wrath for all who believe in Him. God, to whom we were hateful because of sin, was appeased by the death of his Son to become favorable to us. By his sacrificial death, Christ liberates elect believers from sin, guilt, and the penalty of death (161).

Calvin insisted that God loves all persons, #John_3:16, Christ's death was an atonement for the sins of the entire world, #John_1:29, #John_4:42, #1_John_2:2, God desires all to repent, #1_Timothy_2:4, #2_Peter_3:9, and all should be invited to the banquet table of salvation. Likewise, in his commentary on #Romans_5:18, Calvin wrote, though Christ suffered for the sins of the whole world, and is offered through god's benignity indiscriminately to all, yet all do not receive him. God's other will...to which involuntary obedience corresponds, but also of his secret will that effectively leads to salvation. This elective purpose to save, the outcome of God's more special grace, is contained in the unconditional and secret aspect of God's will. Christ's death becomes savingly effective in the elect in whom the Spirit engenders faith. The universal benefits of Christ's death remain potential until the sheep given by the Father comes to the Son by God-given faith (164).

God's love is reflected in his will to save the elect--the heirs of the covenant of grace--for whose sins Christ made satisfaction on the cross (165).

**Ransom** --> was the price paid to free a murderer, #Numbers_35:31-32, purchase the freedom of a relative, #Leviticus_25:50-52, and liberate exiles, #Isaiah_45:13. God himself pays the ransom price and redeems the trusting person from the grip of sin, death, and Stan (176).

**Redemption** --> focuses on the release of persons detained in bondage. To redeem, avenge, do the part of a kinsman. God redeemed Israel by delivering them from Egyptian slavery, #Leviticus_25:50-52, and liberating exiles, #Isaiah_45:13. God Himself pays the ransom price. He redeems the trusting person from the grip of sin, death, and slavery, #Psalm_74:2, #Psalm_77:15, #Exodus_6:6, #Isaiah_63:9, by freeing his people from Babylonian captivity, #Micah_4:10, and by rescuing persons from the consequences of sin, #Psalm_103:4, #Psalm_107:2. #Isaiah_44:22 (177).

**Propitiation** --> render favorable. Propitiation connotes the act of turning aside the wrath of the offended God by means of appropriate sacrifice (178).

**Reconciliation** --> the imagery here is that of the family; individuals formerly alienated and estranged, #Isaiah_59:2, are brought into a state of harmony and peace. Reconciliation connotes that enmity between God and sinners is changed to a relation of friendship and communion (180).

Reconcilitation is closely associated with the non-imputation of sins (Justification) for in verses 21, Paul speaks of reconciled sinners attaining the righteousness of God, namely, that state of being righteous in relation to the law (181).

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Murray, John. *Redemption Accomplished and Applied*. William B. Eerdmans Publishing Company, Grand Rapids: MA, 1955.</mark>

The accomplishment of redemption is concerned with what has been generally called the atonement. No treatment of the atonement can be adequate that does not trace its source to the free and sovereign love of God (3).

The love of God from which the atonement springs is not a distinctionless love: it is a love that elects and predestinates. He is love, and the necessarily inherent and eternally (4).

It was of the free and sovereign good pleasure of his will, a good pleasure that emanated from the depths of his own goodness, that he chose a people to be heirs of God and joint-heirs with Christ (4). 

The atonement does not win or constrain he love of God. The love of God constrains to the atonement as the means of accomplishing love's determined purpose (4).

The love of God is the cause or source of atonement (5).

He by himself purged our sins and sat down on the right hand of the majesty of high, #Hebrews_1:3 (50).

The atonement is objective to us, performed independently of us, and the subjective effects that accrue from its presupposes its accomplishment (50).

Christ tasted death for every son to be brought to glory and for all the children whom God had given to him. This text shows how plausible offhand quotation may be and yet how baseless such an appeal is in support of a doctrine of universal atonement (59).

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Owen, John. Communion with God. Banner of Truth Trust, Carlisle, PA: 2024.</mark>

"Man is utterly unable to make any atonement with God for sin. God has said that no sacrifice, even those he appointed, could atone for sin #Hebrews_10:11; #Hebrews_9:9. Rejecting these sacrifices, Christ in their stead says, Behold I have come, to do your will, O God #Hebrews_10:6-8. So it is by Christ that we are justified from all things from which we could not be justified by the law #Acts_13:39" (105).

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Saint Augustine. *City of God*. Translated by Henry Bettenson. London, England: Penguin Books, 2003. </mark>

When we were overwhelmed by the load of our sins, when we had turned away from the contemplation of his light and had been blinded by your love of darkness, that is of wickedness, even then he did not abandon us. He sent us to his Word, who is his only Son, who was born and who suffered in the flesh which he assumed for our sake so that we might know the value God placed on mankind and might be purified form all our sins by the unique sacrifice and so that when love  has been diffused in our hearts by his Spirit and difficulties have been surmounted, we may come to eternal rest and to the ineffable sweetness of the contemplation of God (293).

"Man is set free from their monstrous and blasphemous domination when he believes him who achieved his resurrection by the example of the humility as great as the pride which brought about the fall of the demons" (294).

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;"> Wellum, Stephen. *The 5 Solas Series: Christ Alone: The Uniqueness of Jesus as Savior*, Grand Rapids, MI: Zondervan, 2017. </mark>

The Son becomes the representative man of #Psalm_8, the last Adam, who is now able to undo the first Adam's failure by his own obedient life and death (111).

By linking Jesus's anguish with the nature of the Fathers cup he must drink. In the OT, the cup is linked with the poruing out of God's wrath, his judicial sentnece against human sin, #Psalm_75:8, #Jeremieh_25:15-29; #Ezekial_23:32-34; #Revelation_14:10, #Revelation_16:1-21; #Revelation_18:6 (204). 
## The Cause and Necessity of the Atonement

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.</mark>

"Jesus offered Himself as a victim in their stead, paid the is view prompts men by laying down His life for transgressors, and thus pacified an angry God. This view prompts men to laud Christ for His supreme self-sacrifice, but at the same time, to blame God for demanding and accepting such a price" (374).

- #Isaiah_53:10 - It was predicted that Jesus would come into the world to carry out the good pleasure of God.
- #John_3:16 - God so loved the world, that He gave His only begotten Son, that whoever believeth in Him should not perish.
- #Galatians_1:4 - for the good pleasure of the Father that Jesus should in all fullness dwell and through Him to reconcile all things unto Himself.

**Not in the arbitrary will of God.**

"In #Romans_3:24, 25, we find both elements combined: Being justified freely by His grace through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus, whom God set forth to be a propitiation through faith in His blood, to declare His righteousness for the remission of past sins, through the forbearance of God. This representation guards against the idea of an arbitrary will" (375).

"It would seem to be clear teaching of Scripture that God, in virtue of His divine righteousness and holiness, cannot simply overlook defiance to His infinite, but must visit sin with punishment. We are told repeatedly that He will by no means clear the guilty #Exodus_34:7; #Numbers_14:18; #Nahum_1:3. He hates sin with a divine hatred; His whole being reacts against it #Psalm_5:4-6; #Nahum_1:2; #Romans_1:18)" (377).

"The majesty and absolute immutability of the divine law as inherent in the very nature of God made it necessary for Him to demand satisfaction of the sinner. The transgressions of the law inevitably carry with them a penalty. God wanted to save the sinner, even though the latter could not meet the demands of the law; He had to make provision for a vicarious satisfaction as a ground for the sinner's justification" (377).

"When Adam entered into the covenant of works, He decreed that death would be the penalty of disobedience. That principle finds expression in many other words of Scripture, such as #Ezekiel_18:4; #Romans_6:23. The veracity of God demanded that the penalty should be executed, and if sinners were to be saved, it should be executed in the life of a substitute" (378).

An objection to the doctrine of the absolute necessity of the atonement: **this makes God inferior to man.** "Man can and often does freely forgive those who wrong him, but, according to the view under consideration, God cannot forgive until He has received satisfaction. This means that He is less good and less charitable than sinful man" (378).

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Bray, Gerald. God Has Spoken: A History of Christian Theology. Wheaton, IL: Crossway, 2024.</mark>

"It is easy to overlook the importance of the fact that the atoning sacrifice which the Son offered to the Father was both acceptable to, and accepted by, hm. It was the Father's acceptance that gave the Son's sacrifice its validity--not the degree of pain that the Son suffered, or even his willingness to get to the cross" (154).

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">DeMarest, Bruce. *The Cross and Salvation: The Doctrine of Salvation*. Crossway, Wheaton, IL: 1997.</mark>

"The theological word Atonement was first used in 1526, in the sense of Reconciliation or restoration of friendly relations between God and sinners. It is not strictly an NT word, being found but once, #Romans_5:11. (167).

A cursory reading of the Bible reveals how the cross is woven into the very fabric of divine revelation. At the dawn of human history, shortly after the Fall, God said to Satan, disguised as a serpent, that the woman's seed would crush his head, and thou will strike his heel, #Genesis_3:15. This ancient prediction indicates that the Messiah's redemptive victory would be achieved at the cost of suffering. (167)."

Christianity is Christ, and the crucial fact about Christ is his passion on the cross (167).

Penal substitution indicates that the Messiah died in the sinner's place and took upon himself the sinner's just punishment. The idea of vicarious, penal substitution is embedded in the warp and woof of Scripture (171).

Absolute necessity** --> reason from the standpoint of sheer justice to conclude that sin's penalty must be paid. However, it overlooks the divine freedom whereby God might have decided not to save rebellious sinners (187).

**Hypothetical necessity** --> there is nothing inherent, such as God or forgiveness, that requires the shed blood of God's Son (187).

Many Reformed thinkers have advanced the concept of consequent absolute necessity. John Murray identified several Scripture texts judged to favor this third alternative (188).

God then acted in accord with his own intrinsic nature and perfections. He operated in harmony with his perfect wisdom, #1_Corinthians_1:24, #1_Corinthians_2:7, #Ephesians_3:10, righteousness, #Pslam 51:14; #Psalm_71:15-16, holiness, #Exodus_15:11; #Isaiah_49:7, #1_Peter_1:15-16, mercy, #Ephesians_2:4, #Titus_3:5, and supremely his agapic love, #John_3:16, #John_15:13, #Romans_5:8, #Ephesians_5:2, #1_John_4:9-10. Given his own rules of how sin would be handled in his moral universe, the course of saving action chosen in light of the foreseen human situation was the wisest, most righteous, and most living course possible (188-89).

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Grudem, Wayne. Systematic Theology. Grand Rapids, MI: Zondervan Academic. 2020.</mark>

"But once God, in his love, decided to save some human beings, then several passages in Scripture indicate that there was no other way for God to do this than through the death of his Son. The atonement was not necessary, but as a consequence of God's decision to save some human beings, the atonement was essential" (706).

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Murray, John. *Redemption Accomplished and Applied*. William B. Eerdmans Publishing Company, Grand Rapids: MA, 1955.</mark>

The Levitical sacrifices were patterned after the heavenly exemplar--they were patterns of the things in heaven #Hebrews_9:23. (9)

The necessity of bloodshedding in the Levitical ordinances is simply a necessity arising from the necessity of bloodshedding in the higher realm of the heavenly (9).

The sum of the matter is that a necessity, #Hebrews_9:23 for the blood-shedding of Christ unto the remission of sins is here propounded, and it is a necessity without reservation or qualification (10-11).

A salvation from sin divorced from justification is an impossibility, and justification of sinners without God-righteousness of the Redeemer is unthinkable (11).

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Wellum, Stephen. *The 5 Solas Series: Christ Alone: The Uniqueness of Jesus as Savior*, Grand Rapids, MI: Zondervan, 2017.## The Nature of the Atonement</mark>

Christ is necessary because God in fact decreed that salvation would come through Christ as the most fitting means to his chosen ends (33). 

Consequent to God's sovereign, free, and gracious choice to save us, God needed to save us in Christ alone (33-34). 

The view of consequent absolute necessity claims that while God was not obligated to redeem sinners, once he did decide to redeem us, there is no possible world in which that redemption could be accomplished apart from the incarnation, life, death, and resurrection of God the Son (34). 

The consequent absolute necessity of Christ arises from the perfection of God's own nature. This view understands that the inherent holiness and justice of God are not limited to his freedom but the nature in which God acts perfectly within his liberty (34). 

Scripture creates both the expectation and necessity that God would bring salvation in the person and work of Christ (34). 

Christ alone is absolutely necessary, given God's choice to redeem a sinful humanity (34).

Christus Victor was another way of viewing the cross, a view often associated with the ransom theory to Satan. In this view, the priamry object of Christs deaht is the power fo sin, death, and Satan (163).

Christus Victor appealed to the abundant NT teaching that Christ's death achieved our redemption and defeated the power of Satan, #Mark_10:45, #Luke_4:18, #Colossians_2:13-15; #Hebrews_2:14-16. (163).

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.</mark>

"The doctrine of the atonement here presented is the penal substitionary or satification doctrine, which is the doctrine taught by the Word of God" (380).

"The reconciled God justifies the sinner who accepts the, and so operates in his heart by the Holy Spirit, that the sinner also lays aside his wicked alienation from God, and thus enters into the fruits of the perfect atonement of Christ. The fact that Christ reconciles God to the sinner results in a reflex action on the sinner, in virtue of which the sinner may be said to be reconciled to God" (380).

"The priests in their sacrificial and intercessory work represented men in the presence of God, and therefore looked in a Godward direction" ( 381).

"The blood of the sacrifice is interposed between God and the sinner, and given it, the wrath of God is turned aside" (381).

The words *katalasso* and *katalage* signify "to reconcile" and "reconciliation". They point to an action by which enmity is changed to friendship, and surely have, first of all, an objective signification. The offender reconciles, not himself, but the person whom he has offended" (382).

"There are several passages in Scripture, which speak of our sins as being laid upon Christ and of His bearing sin or iniquity #Isaiah_53:6; #John_1:29; #2_Corinthians_5:21; #Galatians_3:13; #Hebrews_9:28; #1_Peter_2:24)" (384).

"Christ as Mediator entered the federal relation in which Adam stood in the state of integrity, to merit eternal life for the sinner. This constitutes the active obedience of Christ, consisting in all that Christ did to observe the law in its federal aspect, as the condition for obtaining eternal life" (387).

 - <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">DeMarest, Bruce. *The Cross and Salvation: The Doctrine of Salvation*. Crossway, Wheaton, IL: 1997.</mark>

**Other Atonement Motifs**
1. Ransom

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Murray, John. *Redemption Accomplished and Applied*. William B. Eerdmans Publishing Company, Grand Rapids: MA, 1955.</mark>

The Scripture regards the work of Christ as one of obedience (14).

The truth expressed rests upon the recognition that the law of God has both penal sanctions and positive demands. It demands not only the full discharge of its precepts but also the infliction of penalty for all infringements and shortcomings (17).

He took care of the guilt of sin and perfectly fulfilled the demand for righteousness. He perfectly met both the penal and the preceptive requirements of God's law (17)

What the obedience of Christ involved for him is perhaps nowhere more strikingly expressed than in #Hebrews_2:10-18 and #Hebrews_5:8-10, where we are told that Jesus learned obedience from the things which he suffered, that he was made perfect through sufferings, and that being made perfect, he became to all who obey him the author of eternal salvation (17).

We become the beneficiaries of it, indeed the partakers of it, by union with him (19).

Propitiation is not a turning of the wrath of God into love. The propitiation of the divine wrath, effected into the expiatory work of Christ, is the provision of God's eternal and unchangeable love, so that through the propitiation of his own wrath that love may realize its purpose in a way that is consonant with and to the glory of the dictates of his holiness (27).

The propitiation is the ground upon which the divine love operates and the channel through which it flows in achieving its end (28).

The atonement is that which meets the exigencies of holiness and justice. The wrath of God is the inevitable reaction of the divine holiness against sin (28).

The curse of the law is its penal substitution (41).

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Wellum, Stephen. *The 5 Solas Series: Christ Alone: The Uniqueness of Jesus as Savior*, Grand Rapids, MI: Zondervan, 2017.</mark>

The Cross is the sign of the Christian faith. The whole struggle of the Reformatino for the 8sola fide8, the 8sola deo gloria8, ws simply the struggle for the right interpretation of the Cross (195). 

The Gospels are deliberaretly written to stress the centrality of Christ's deaht for understanding his identity and work. Apart from the cross, we cannot grasp him and the entire rationale for his coming (195). 

Jesus's cross is the ground of our salvatio. The cross is necessary in God's eternal plan to achieve our redemption (197).

Our contention is that penal substition best accounts for the centrality and necessity of the cross for God's redemptive plan; indeed, it is absolutely necessary (197).

Jesus views his death as sacrificial and substituionary in light of the exodus, Passover, sacrifical system, and #Isaiah_53 (201).
## The Purpose and the Extent of the Atonement

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Berkhof, Louis. Systematic Theology. Carlisle, PA: The Banner of Truth, 2021.</mark>

"The atonement was destined to affect the relation of God to the sinner, [[12.01 The States of Christ|state of Christ]], and conditions as the Mediatorial author of salvation, and the state and condition of the sinner" (401).

"The atonement secured a manifold reward for Christ as Mediator. He was constituted the life-giving Spirit, the inexhaustible source of all the blessings of salvation for sinners. He received:

 - All that belonged to His glorification, including His present Messianic glory.
 - The fullness of those gifts and graces which He imparts to His people.
 - The gift of the Holy Spirit for the formation of His mystical body and the subjective application of the fruits of His atoning work.
 - The end of the earth for His possession and the world for HIs dominion" (401-02).
- Reconciliation & Redemption

- B<mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">ray, Gerald. The Doctrine of God: Contours of Christian Theology. Downers Grove, IL: InterVarsity Press, 1993.</mark>

"Christ, the tree of life, would never have become available to human beings had Adam not sinned; therefore, so this argument runs, even sin ultimately furthers the purposes of God and is subject to his omniscient power and will" (90).

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">DeYoung, Kevin. Daily Doctrine. Wheaton, IL: Crossway, 2025.</mark>

"The doctrine of limited atonement teaches that Christ effectively redeems from every people's only those who were chosen from eternity to salvation." (Canons of Dort, 2.8). The death of Christ was sufficient to atone for the sins of the whole world, but God willed that it should effectively redeem those and only those who were chosen from eternity and given to Christ by the Father" (227).

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Sproul, RC. Truths We Confess: A Systematic Exposition of the Westminster Confession of Faith. Orlando, FL: Reformation Trust, 2019.</mark>

"Christ died specifically for the elect and only for the elect. God gave His Son a certain number of people, and Christ laid down His life for them. The atonement is efficacious only for those whom the Father gives to the Son. That text #John_6:35-40 is unpopular because contemporary evangelicalism assumes that Christ died for everyone's sin" (20).

- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Sir Basil the Great. On the Holy Spirit. Trans. Stephen Hildebrand. Yonkers, NY: Saint Vladimir's Seminary Press, 2011.</mark>

"Our God and Savior's plan for man is his restoration from the fall and his return from the alienation of disobedience to kindship with God. And so that man who is saved receives back that original adopted sonship by imitating Christ" (66).

